Characters

Character Types

Player characters in Ars Magica fall into three categories, depending on
their role in the story. Magi are members of the Order of Hermes, the
powerful wizards around whom the game centers. Companions are important
characters who are not magi, while grogs are minor characters.

Most players of Ars Magica have at least two characters, and often more,
although they do not play all of them at once. The characters to be
played depend on events in the saga, and this is discussed in more
detail in the section on Troupe-Style Roleplaying, on page @@.

Magi

A magus (feminine maga, plural magi, feminine plural magae) is a
powerful wizard, even when he has only just finished his training. Magi
rule the covenant around which a saga revolves, and have the potential
to become as powerful as any human being can. A magus player character
belongs to a single player, who has complete control over that
character\'s decisions.

Although magi are very powerful, they are also limited in important ways
by The Gift, their ability to work magic (see pages @@ and @@). This
means that there are some things that only non-magi can do effectively.
In addition, magi are rarely skilled at anything other than magic, which
means that they need help in everyday affairs.

Companions

A companion is an important non-magus. Like magi, player character
companions belong to a single player, who controls that character\'s
decisions. Beyond this, companions have little in common with one
another. One might be a knight and veteran of the Crusades, another
might be a wandering friar, a third an unGifted Redcap, still another a
noblewoman. Because the Order of Hermes stands somewhat outside medieval
society, it tends to attract those who do not fit in, so a companion
could also be a woman who wants to serve as a knight, a priest who sees
supernatural visions and has tipped into heresy, or a werewolf seeking
someone who might be able to cure her affliction.

Although each player has a magus and a companion, they are almost never
played together, and thus should not be linked to each other. Linking
your companion to another player\'s magus is a good idea, though, as
that provides two player characters with a reason to investigate things
together. If you do link your companion to another player\'s magus, your
companion should have abilities that complement those of the magus,
rather than overlapping.

Companions should generally not have The Gift, unless you intend to play
through apprenticeship so that they become magi at some point.

Mythic Companions

You may find, when playing **Ars Magica**, that you would like to play a
character who is comparable in power to a Hermetic magus without
actually playing a member of the Order of Hermes. There are many
individuals in Mythic Europe who have strange and potent abilities,
including non-Hermetic wizards, holy hermits and supernaturally strong
warriors. In **Ars Magica** such characters are referred collectively as
Mythic Companions. While Hermetic magi are normally still the most
potent characters in terms of raw power, Mythic Companions approach
them. However, as they are not members of the Order of Hermes, they
cannot play the same social role in a saga as a magus.

If you wish to play a Mythic Companion, you should normally play it as
an alternative to a magus character, though the troupe may disregard
this guideline, depending on how your saga is being conducted. The
troupe may also decide to not allow Mythic Companions in the saga at
all, if they want to focus on a "standard" Hermetic covenant.

General guidelines for Mythic Companions, and some examples, are given
at the end of this chapter, and many **Ars Magica** supplements include
guidelines for further specific types. You may also create your own type
of Mythic Companion, in cooperation with the troupe.

Grogs

Grogs are minor characters, often warriors who protect the magi and
defend the covenant, but also including specialists such as bookbinders
and teachers who are not important enough in the story to be created as
companions.

As minor characters, grogs tend to have bad things happen to them.
Warrior grogs die defending the magi, other grogs might be possessed by
spirits, forced to marry a faerie lord, or die from a disease that
threatens the covenant. In most versions of troupe-style play, grogs are
played by many different players, and the storyguide sometimes simply
tells the players what happened to a grog.

On the other hand, grogs are a great deal of fun to play. You don\'t
need to worry too much about the consequences of your actions, because
you probably won\'t be playing this character next week. You can ham up
the acting, and have the grog do something stupidly heroic, or
heroically stupid. If a grog charges into lone battle against a dragon,
in order to defend a magus, he might die in a couple of rounds, in which
case he is remembered fondly, or make some stupendously lucky rolls and
kill the dragon, in which case he becomes a hero. With a grog, you can
take that risk, while with a companion or magus you will probably want
to be more cautious. Of course, it\'s also fun to play a grog who
debates with the magus about the wisdom of staying to face a dragon.

Grogs are often generated from the grog templates, starting on page @@.
They may be created by detailed character creation, but should have no
Major Virtues or Flaws, and no more than three Minor Flaws, balanced by
an equal number of Minor Virtues. In addition, grogs should not have
Story Flaws, as they are supposed to be minor characters. Finally, grogs
can never have The Gift. A character with The Gift is too important to
be a grog.

Character Basics

This section outlines the way that the game rules describe characters.

Size

All **Ars Magica** characters have a Size score. However, almost all
adult human characters have the same Size score, 0, as this represents
an average adult human. Every three points of Size represents a ten-fold
increase or decrease in mass, and adult humans can range from Size -2 to
Size +2, if they take appropriate Virtues or Flaws. The effects of this
are described in the Virtues chapter, page @@. Size is more important
for non-human creatures, and is discussed in detail in the Bestiary
chapter, page @@.

Virtues and Flaws

Virtues and Flaws are features of the character that are not shared by
most people; special benefits in the case of Virtues, and disadvantages
or hooks into stories for Flaws. They cover supernatural abilities,
including The Gift, enemies, obsessions, and aptitudes, as well as much
more. All Virtues and Flaws are listed in their own chapter, starting on
page @@.

Characteristics

There are eight Characteristics in Ars Magica, each representing one of
a given character\'s inborn attributes. Each Characteristic has a score
that describes the degree of the character\'s aptitude. A score of 0 is
completely average, and therefore positive numbers denote
higher-than-average ability and negative numbers below-average ability.
All but the most exceptional of individuals have Characteristics that
fall between --3 and +3.

Since Characteristics represent your character\'s inborn potential, they
cannot be increased by normal means. In rare circumstances, the
storyguide may decide that drastic events warrant some sort of permanent
change to a Characteristic, and powerful magic can also raise them, but
for most characters, they are fixed.

Characteristic Descriptions

**Intelligence (Int)**

Intelligence represents the power to analyze and synthesize concepts, as
well as simple memory. It is important for Abilities that require
thought power and is paramount for the Hermetic Arts. A character with
low Intelligence is not necessarily stupid---common sense, street savvy,
wisdom, and the ability to learn are not described by Intelligence.

**Perception (Per)**

Perception quantifies the ability to notice things, as well as powers of
intuition. While sometimes conscious, Perception often works intuitively
--- your character simply notices something. The storyguide may also let
you roll Perception when checking various Knowledges, to see if you have
insight into a certain fact or concept. Perception is important for
Abilities such as Awareness, Hunt, and Folk Ken.

**Strength (Str)**

Strength measures physical power: lifting, pushing, shoving, heaving and
moving. Strength is important when hefting a melee weapon and when using
brute, physical force against something or someone. People with high
Strength are often bigger than those with low Strength, assuming they
have the same Size.

**Stamina (Sta)**

Stamina represents the limits of a character\'s exertion, as well as how
much physical punishment he can sustain. It is staying power, both
mental and physical, and one of its most important components is simply
the will to live. Spellcasting relies on Stamina. Stamina also measures
someone\'s ability to carry a load for an extended period, ignore
fatigue, and withstand wounds.

**Presence (Prs)**

Presence describes a character\'s appearance, demeanor, and charisma. It
is important for making a good impression, as well as for leading
people. Presence also measures how imposing or intimidating a person is.
Even if not physically attractive, a person with high Presence might
still have a demeanor that commands respect.

**Communication (Com)**

Communication represents the aptitude for self-expression. It is
important when attempting to influence or communicate with someone,
verbally or otherwise. A positive Communication score suggests a
character who is comfortable with or confident in his relationships with
other people.

**Dexterity (Dex)**

Dexterity means being able to move with agility and to manipulate
objects accurately and skillfully. It includes hand-eye coordination,
fine motor control, and bodily grace. Dexterity also helps determine how
well your character swings a sword or throws a knife.

**Quickness (Qik)**

Quickness indicates reaction speed and reflexes, and helps determine who
acts first when two people are trying to do something with great haste.
It also describes how well your character does something in a hurry.
Your effective Quickness is usually modified by your Encumbrance. See
page @@ for more information on Encumbrance.

Abilities

Abilities are a character\'s learned skills. They usually do increase
during the course of a saga. Characters in Ars Magica can choose from a
wide range of Abilities, listed in the Abilities chapter starting on
page @@, which are divided into five types: General Abilities, which can
be learned by anyone, and Academic Abilities, Arcane Abilities, Martial
Abilities, and Supernatural Abilities. A character can only learn
Academic, Arcane, or Martial Abilities if he has an appropriate Virtue
or Flaw, or is a magus.

Supernatural Abilities are even more limited, and a character can only
learn one if she meets certain special conditions. The most common is
the possession of the Virtue granting that Supernatural Ability, but The
Gift allows characters to learn such Abilities, and other supplements
describe other ways to access them. Unless a character has a feature
that specifically says she can learn a Supernatural Ability, she cannot.

Finally, Spell Mastery Abilities are only available to Hermetic magi,
and are described on page @@.

Personality Traits

Personality Traits are a short description of important features of your
character\'s personality. For major characters, such as magi and
companions, they are normally nothing more than an aide memoire, and a
reason to think about the character\'s personality during character
creation, although there are a few specific rules that require
Personality Trait rolls.

For grogs, they are more significant. As grogs are often shared between
players, or at least played rarely (see Troupe-Style Roleplaying on page
@@), the numbers attached to Personality Traits can be used as a
concrete guide to playing the character. They can be positive or
negative, and normally range between +3 and --3, although there are
exceptions. A Minor Personality Flaw (see later) would normally be
matched by a Personality Trait of +3 or --3, while a Major Personality
Flaw, which a grog would not normally have, would justify a Personality
Trait of +6 or --6. \'Loyal\' is a particularly important Trait, as it
reflects the grog\'s attachment to the covenant, while \'Brave\' is just
as important for warrior grogs. A third Trait should be something
distinctive about that grog. You may decide to roll a grog\'s
Personality Traits when you are unsure how he would react, or you may
treat the numbers simply as a guide to roleplaying. If you do roll them,
add nothing but the Personality Trait, and roll a stress die. Suggested
Ease Factors are found on the table.

Personality Rolls

**Ease Factor Brave Loyal General**

0 Not really scary. Facing down a barking dog. Loyalty and self-interest
coincide. Warning the magi that your enemy is planning to attack the
covenant. Average people would always do this.

3 Hardly scary. Facing down an angry, but unarmed, peasant while armed
and armored. Little loyalty required. Not denouncing the magi to the
bishop passing through the local village. Average people would usually
do this. People noted for a Personality Trait would always do this.

6 Scary. Facing down an apparently equal enemy. Average loyalty.
Standing by the covenant when it is threatened. Average people do this
about half the time.

9 Very scary. Facing down a clearly superior enemy. Loyal. Resisting a
large bribe and offer of protection. Average people usually don\'t do
this, and even notable people often fail.

12 Extremely scary. Facing down a dragon. Very Loyal. Staying loyal to
the covenant under torture. Average people almost always fail. Even
people noted for the Trait do this rarely.

Changing Personality Traits

Personality Traits can only be changed by the player who controls the
character, and only between game sessions. However, they can be changed
freely, possibly to reflect a series of exceptional rolls, or to reflect
life events. For example, a cowardly grog who stands his ground and
kills an impressive monster might well become braver.

Reputations

Reputations determine whether people are likely to have heard of the
character, and what they have heard about him. They don\'t determine how
people react to characters they have heard of, as that depends on what
they think of what they\'ve heard, nor do they necessarily aid in the
identification of characters. Indeed, in some cases a high Reputation
may make it difficult for a character to convince people that he is who
he says he is. (\"Oh, *sure* you\'re Sir Robert the Dragonslayer. Of
*course* he\'d be visiting my inn. Who are you really?\")

Reputations have a score, a content, and a type. The score is a number,
used as described below. The content is what the Reputation is for; a
reputation for killing dragons, powerful fire magic, or learned
interpretation of the Psalms, for example. The type determines who might
have heard of the Reputation. The most basic type is a Local Reputation,
which is one that anyone who lives near the character might have heard.
The other two main types are Ecclesiastical and Hermetic Reputations,
determining a character\'s reputation in the Church and Order of Hermes,
respectively. The type of Reputation defines what counts as distance.

A random person has heard of a character with a Reputation if a roll of
a stress die plus the Reputation equals or exceeds the Ease Factor given
on the table below. The more he succeeds by, the more he has heard about
the character. If the character\'s Reputation is largely accurate, so is
what the person has heard. Conversely, a largely underserved Reputation
brings lots of false beliefs with it.

Reputations can change over time. See the Long-Term Events chapter, page
@@, for details.

Reputation Ease Factors

**Ease Factor Local Ecclesiastical Hermetic Comments**

0 Same village Same parish/monastery Same covenant Everyone in these
groups has heard of everyone else in them.

6 Same town Same diocese Same Tribunal On average, people have heard of
about half the people in this area, and of most people who have any sort
of reputation.

9 Same county Same province Entire Order In general, only people with a
reputation are known in this group, but everyone knows a few other
people.

12 Same country Whole Church N/A Most people in this wider world are
unknown, but those with outstanding reputations may be.

Confidence

Important characters have a Confidence Score and Confidence Points. This
includes both central player characters (magi and companions) and
important NPCs, such as recurring antagonists and allies. These
characters start with three Confidence Points. Most such characters
start with a Confidence Score of one, but this can be modified by
Virtues and Flaws.

There is no limit to the number of Confidence Points that a character
can have.

Using Confidence

A player may spend Confidence Points on most rolls to get +3 to the
total per point spent. He may decide to spend the point after the dice
are rolled and the putative result of the action is known. He may not
spend Confidence on a roll that botched, but he may spend it on a roll
of zero which was not a botch. A player may spend any number of points
up to, but not exceeding, the character\'s Confidence Score.

Once a Confidence Point is spent, it is gone forever. Confidence Points
are not recovered.

Confidence may not be spent on rolls which represent a whole season\'s
activities, such as rolls for studying from vis.

Getting New Confidence Points

The storyguide for a session hands out Confidence Points to characters
at the end of the session. To qualify for Confidence Points, the
character must have been played for a significant length of time during
that session, and must have made a contribution to the session.

Characters should be awarded one Confidence Point for each of the
following that they managed:

Achieve a personal goal.

Contribute to achievement of a group goal, even if it wasn\'t a personal
goal.

Success in a difficult task. (Only one award per character per session.)

Entertainingly well roleplayed. This means that the player portrayed the
character well, and in a way that entertained and enhanced the fun of
the other players.

Bonus. This point is awarded if the storyguide thinks that the character
or player did something that deserves a reward, but which does not fall
under the above categories. You should only award one bonus point per
character per session.

Typical characters should gain two or three Confidence Points per
session.

Raising Confidence Score

A character\'s Confidence Score can only be increased by long-term story
events which greatly increase the character\'s self-confidence and
self-reliance. As a baseline, the fifteen grueling years of a Tytalus
apprenticeship are enough to raise a character\'s Confidence Score by
one point. Raises in play should follow on events of a similar magnitude
and duration.

Character Templates

The quickest way to get started playing Ars Magica is to choose one of
the characters presented in this section. All are fully generated, and
just need a name and a bit of background to fit them into your saga. The
second quickest way is to customize one of these characters. Finally,
you can use the Detailed Character Creation rules, starting on page @@,
to build your own character from scratch.

Format

Each template is presented in the same format, described below.

**Characteristics:** A list of the Characteristics and values. If the
character has any aging points in any Characteristics, these are shown
in parentheses after the Characteristic value. (See Long Term Events,
page @@, for aging rules.)

**Size:** The character\'s size.

**Age:** The character\'s actual age, with the apparent age in
parentheses. (See Long Term Events, page @@, for aging rules and
apparent age.)

**Decrepitude:** The character\'s number of Decrepitude points, with the
number of excess Aging Points in parentheses. These are gained from
aging, and are described on page @@.

**Warping Score:** The character\'s Warping Score, with the number of
excess Warping Points in parentheses. Warping Points measure a
character\'s exposure to magic, and have bad effects if you gain too
many. See Warping, on page @@, for more details.

**Confidence Score:** The character\'s Confidence Score, with the number
of Confidence Points in parentheses. Grogs don\'t have Confidence, so
this line is omitted.

**Virtues and Flaws:** All the character\'s Virtues and Flaws. These are
all described in the Virtues and Flaws chapter, starting on page @@. The
first Virtue listed is The Gift, if the character has it. The next is
the character\'s Social Class. Then come all other Major Virtues, in
alphabetical order, Minor Virtues, alphabetically, Major Flaws,
alphabetically, and Minor Flaws, also arranged in alphabetical order.

**Personality Traits:** The character\'s Personality Traits, and scores.

**Reputations:** Details of the character\'s Reputations, if any.

**Combat:** The combat statistics for modes of attack and weapons that
the character uses often.

**Soak:** The character\'s Soak score.

**Fatigue levels:** A listing of the character\'s Fatigue levels and
penalties, which represent how tired the character is. Fatigue is
described on page @@.

**Wound Penalties:** Shows the penalties for wounds of varying severity,
with the number of points of damage required to inflict a wound of that
severity shown in parentheses.

**Abilities:** All of the character\'s Abilities, in alphabetical order.
The format is Ability X (Z) (specialization), where X is the score in
the Ability and Z is the number of experience points acquired towards
the next level. If the Ability is written X+Y (Z), X is the score in the
Ability, Y is a fixed bonus from a Virtue (usually Puissant Ability),
and Z is the number of experience points acquired towards the next
level.

**Arts:** The character\'s scores in the Hermetic Arts, in the format
Art X (Z), where X is the score and Z the number of experience points
acquired towards the next level. If the Art is written X+Y (Z), X is the
score in the Ability, Y is a fixed bonus from a Virtue (usually Puissant
Art), and Z is the number of experience points acquired towards the next
level. The Arts are named according to the standard abbreviations,
described on page @@. Non-magi have no scores in the Arts, and this
section is omitted.

**Twilight Scars:** Long lasting effects of Wizard\'s Twilight. Only
applicable to Hermetic magi, and described in detail on page @@.

**Equipment:** The character\'s stuff.

**Encumbrance:** The character\'s Encumbrance, with the character\'s
Burden in parentheses. The rules for Encumbrance are on page @@.

**Spells Known:** A list of all the Hermetic spells the character knows.
Obviously, this is omitted for non-magi. The spells are in the format:
Spell Name (TeFo X/+Y) where TeFo is the Technique and Form of the
spell, X is the spell level, and Y is the magus\'s Casting Total with
the spell. If the magus has a mastery score in the spell, this is listed
as Mastery Z, outside the parentheses, with the Mastery abilities listed
(see the Magic chapter, page @@). If the Casting Total is higher than
the spell level, the magus can cast it easily. If it\'s significantly
lower, he might have problems. The spells are described in the Spells
chapter, from page @@.

**Customization Notes:** Some notes on the character, and what can
easily be changed if you want to customize it.

Grog Templates

These templates are intended for use as grogs. You could expand one into
a companion fairly easily, though.

The Berserker

**Characteristics:** Int --2, Per --1, Pre --1, Com --1, Str +3, Sta +2,
Dex +2, Qik +1

**Size:** +1

**Age:** 15 (15)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Covenfolk; Berserk, Large; Short Attention Span,
Wrathful (Minor)

**Personality Traits:** Angry +3, Brave +3, Loyal +1

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:** Pole Axe: Init +2, Attack +13, Defense +7, Damage +14

Kick: Init +0, Attack +6, Defense +4, Damage +6

**Soak:** +9 (Stamina, full metal scale armor)

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--6), --3 (7--12), --5 (13--18),
Incapacitated (19--24)

**Abilities:** Area Lore 1 (streams), Athletics 2 (running), Awareness 3
(attackers), Brawl 3 (kicking), Guile 1 (apologizing), Great Weapons 5
(pole axe), Native Language 5 (insults), Single Weapon 1 (heater
shield), Survival 3 (hills)

**Equipment:** Pole Axe, Full metal scale armor, pack containing gear to
care for weapons and armor and establish camps when traveling.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (3)

**Customization Notes:** The Berserker\'s Large Virtue could be swapped
out for an Affinity or Puissant Ability with Great Weapons. In addition
he could have another Flaw, and take one of those Virtues to balance it.
Other than that, he is young, so most of his Abilities are dictated by
the concept. The Abilities at 1 or 2 can be swapped around, though.

The Grizzled Veteran

**Characteristics:** Int 0, Per 0, Pre --1, Com --1, Str 0, Sta +1 (1),
Dex +2 (2), Qik +2 (2)

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 45 (45)

**Decrepitude:** 1 (2)

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Covenfolk; Warrior; Weakness (talking back to
magi)

**Personality Traits:** Loyal +3, Cheeky +2, Brave +1

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:** Axe & Heater Shield: Init --1, Attack +15, Defense +14,
Damage +6

Kick: Init --3, Attack +6, Defense +5, Damage +3

**Soak:** +8 (full metal scale armor)

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Area A Lore 4 (monsters), Area B Lore 2 (monsters),
Awareness 5 (in combat), Bows 5 (longbow), Brawl 3 (kicking), Carouse 3
(with fighting friends), Folk Ken 1 (magi), Great Weapon 5 (pole axe),
Guile 2 (getting extra rations), Leadership 3 (in combat), Living
Language 5 (military talk), Order of Hermes Lore 3 (grogs), Single
Weapon 8 (heater shield), Stealth 3 (when armored), Survival 1 (when in
a group), Thrown Weapon 4 (knife)

**Equipment:** Axe, Heater Shield, Full metal scale armor, pack
containing gear to care for weapons and armor and establish camps when
traveling.

**Encumbrance:** 4 (4)

**Customization Notes:** The Grizzled Veteran has been around the
covenant for years, but has never reached a formal position of
leadership, because he has a tendency to talk back to the magi. On the
other hand, he makes a good informal leader of the grogs. Age hasn\'t
really slowed him down yet, but it is about to, and the years have
already reduced his Presence and Communication to --1 each. He could
take another two Flaws and a corresponding number of Virtues if desired,
and his Ability scores can be moved around. The high set should probably
be kept in combat, but he could specialize in a different sort of combat
(you would have to recalculate Combat Totals), and the secondary
abilities can be moved around at will.

The Hunter

**Characteristics:** Int 0, Per +3, Pre --2, Com -2, Str 0, Sta +1, Dex
+2, Qik +2

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 20 (20)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Covenfolk; Warrior; Pessimistic

**Personality Traits:** Brave +3, Loyal +1, Pessimistic +3

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:** Short Bow: Init --1, Attack +9, Defense +6, Damage +6

**Soak:** +3 (partial leather armor, Stamina)

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Area Lore 4 (game trails), Athletics 1 (climbing),
Awareness 5 (woodlands), Bows 4 (shooting from cover), Hunt 5 (deer),
Native Language 5 (talking about forests), Stealth 2 (hunting), Survival
4 (woodlands)

**Equipment:** Partial heavy leather, short bow, arrows, survival kit.

**Encumbrance:** 2 (2)

**Customization Notes:** The hunter is extremely useful in the
wilderness, and can guide the party as well as take part in missile
combat. He can also help to support the covenant by bringing in food. He
doesn\'t work well in social situations, though. Note that the
character\'s Bows score uses the bonus XP from Warrior, and thus cannot
go below 4, but otherwise the values of his Abilities, apart from his
Native Language, can be swapped freely.

The Specialist

**Characteristics:** Int --1, Per 0, Pre --1, Com --4, Str +2, Sta +2,
Dex +3, Qik +2

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 19 (19)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Covenfolk; Affinity with Single Weapon, Puissant
Ability (Single Weapon), Warrior; Afflicted Tongue (stammer), Obsessed
(improving Single Weapon ability), Poor Communication

**Personality Traits:** Brave +3, Loyal +2, Quiet +1

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:** Axe & Heater Shield: Init +1, Attack +17, Defense +15,
Damage +8

Fist: Init 0, Attack +8, Defense +7, Damage +2

**Soak:** +9 (full metal scale armor)

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Area Lore 3 (warriors), Athletics 3 (running), Awareness
4 (in combat), Bargain 2 (weapons), Bows 1 (2) (short bow), Brawl 5
(dodging), Carouse 1 (drinking), Living Language 5 (talking about
fighting), Single Weapon 7+2 (Heater Shield)

**Equipment:** Axe, Heater Shield, Full metal scale armor, pack
containing gear to care for weapons and armor and establish camps when
traveling.

**Encumbrance:** 2 (4)

**Customization Notes:** The Specialist can easily focus on a different
Ability, although you might want to swap the Characteristics around as
well if he does, and probably change Warrior for one of the other
experience-point-granting Virtues, such as Educated or Well-Traveled.
You can change Personality Traits freely, and assign the Ability scores
to other Abilities. Similarly, the Flaws can be changed without changing
the central concept of the character.

The Standard Soldier

**Characteristics:** Int --1, Per 0, Pre 0, Com 0, Str +1, Sta +1, Dex
+2, Qik +2

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 25 (25)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Covenfolk; Warrior; Weakness

**Personality Traits:** Brave +3, Loyal +2, Garrulous +1

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:** Axe & Heater Shield: Init +0, Attack +12, Defense +11,
Damage +7

Fist: Init --1, Attack +7, Defense +7, Damage +1

**Soak:** +8 (full metal scale armor)

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Area Lore 3 (taverns), Athletics 3 (running), Awareness 3
(in combat), Bows 4 (short bow), Brawl 4 (punching), Carouse 3
(drinking), Charm 2 (opposite sex), Etiquette 2 (magi), Great Weapon 4
(pole axe), Guile 2 (avoiding duties), Native Language 5 (rude words),
Single Weapon 5 (heater shield), Survival 1 (for a short period)

**Equipment:** Axe, Heater Shield, Full metal scale armor, pack
containing gear to care for weapons and armor and establish camps when
traveling.

**Encumbrance:** 3 (4)

**Customization Notes:** The standard soldier\'s Weakness can be chosen
freely, and he makes a good base for creating a slightly non-standard
grog, by adding Virtues and Flaws and rearranging his Abilities.

The Tough Guy

**Characteristics:** Int --1, Per 0, Pre +1, Com -1, Str +1, Sta +3, Dex
0, Qik +1

**Size:** +1

**Age:** 19 (19)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Covenfolk; Large, Tough, Warrior; No Sense of
Direction, Overconfident (thinks he can\'t really be hurt), Weakness
(drinking)

**Personality Traits:** Brave +3, Loyal +2, Overconfident +3

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:** Axe & Heater Shield: Init --1, Attack +10, Defense +10,
Damage +7

Fist: Init --2, Attack +3, Defense +4, Damage +1

**Soak:** +13 (full metal scale armor + Tough)

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--6), --3 (7--12), --5 (13--18),
Incapacitated (19--24)

**Abilities:** Area Lore (brewers) 2, Athletics 1 (running), Awareness 3
(in combat), Bows 1 (shortbow), Brawl 3 (grappling), Carouse 4
(drinking), Charm (when drunk) 3, Folk Ken (magi) 1, Great Weapon 3
(pole axe), Guile (lying to magi) 1, Living Language 5 (talking about
fighting), Music 1 (drinking songs), Single Weapon (heater shield) 5,
Survival 1 (on rivers), Thrown Weapon 2 (axe)

**Equipment:** Axe, Heater Shield, Full metal scale armor, pack
containing gear to care for weapons and armor and establish camps when
traveling.

**Encumbrance:** 3 (4)

**Customization Notes:** The Tough Guy works well as a defender for a
magus, because he can take a lot of punishment before dropping and
making the magus vulnerable. The Virtues depend on the concept, but the
Flaws can be changed freely, and his combat Ability scores can be
swapped freely between the combat Abilities he has.

Companion Templates

These templates are for central, but non-magus, characters.

The Female Scholar

**Characteristics:** Int +5, Per +1, Pre +1, Com +2, Str --1, Sta --1,
Dex 0, Qik +1

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 20 (20)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Clerk; Apt Student, Book Learner, Good Teacher,
Great Intelligence (x2), Improved Characteristics; Black Sheep, Driven
(Major) (prove herself a greater scholar than any man); Social Handicap
(outspoken advocate of the abilities of women)

**Personality Traits:** Scholarly +3, Independent +1, Trusting --2

**Reputations:** Selfish shrew 2 (local)

**Combat:** Dodging: Init +1, Atk n/a, Def +1, Dam n/a

**Soak:** --1 (Stamina)

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Arabic 1 (medical terms), Area Lore 2 (nunneries), Artes
Liberales 3 (rhetoric), Charm 2 (scholars), Church Lore 2 (scholars),
Civil and Canon Law 1 (rights of women), Folk Ken 2 (scholars), Guile 2
(lying to authority figures), Latin 5 (academic debate), Living Language
5 (debate), Medicine 1 (women\'s illnesses), Philosophiae 3 (moral
philosophy), Teaching 3 (Artes Liberales), Theology 2 (status of women)

**Equipment:** Clothes, a slate or wax tablet for writing on.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Customization Notes:** The female scholar has estranged herself from
her family by refusing to marry a suitable man, and instead pursuing her
bizarre interest in academia. She has probably come to the covenant
because it is the only place where she can study freely, and she wants
access to the covenant library if she doesn\'t already have it. Her
current Virtues are very focused on scholarship, so changing one or two
for Virtues that emphasize a different aspect of her life would be fine.
Similarly, the emphasis of her studies could be moved to a different
subject, as long as she still has a score of at least one in Artes
Liberales, so that she is literate.

The Knight

**Characteristics:** Int 0, Per 0, Pre +1, Com +1, Str +1, Sta +1, Dex
+2, Qik +2

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 25 (25)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Knight; Wealthy; Improved Characteristics,
Puissant Single Weapon, Relic; Oath of Fealty, Proud (Major);
Overconfident (Minor)

**Personality Traits:** Brave +3, Overconfident +3, Proud +6

**Reputations:** None.

**Combat:** Long sword and heater shield (mounted): Init +2, Atk +17,
Def +17, Dam +7

Long sword and heater shield (on foot): Init +2, Atk +14, Def +14, Dam
+7

Great sword (mounted): Init +2, Atk +16, Def +13, Dam +10

Great sword (on foot): Init +2, Atk +13, Def +10, Dam +10

Fist: Init +0, Atk +5, Def +5, Dam +1

**Soak:** +10 (chain mail, Stamina)

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Animal Handling 2 (falconry), Area Lore 3 (nobles),
Athletics 2 (running), Awareness 3 (battle), Brawl 2 (punching),
Chirurgy 1 (sword wounds), Etiquette (noble) 3, Great Weapon 5 (great
sword), Hunt 2 (deer), Intrigue 1 (noble courts), Leadership 4
(soldiers), Music 1 (singing), Native Language 5 (giving orders), Ride 5
(in combat), Single Weapon 5+2 (heater shield), Survival 1 (forests)

**Equipment:** Full chain mail, long sword, heater shield, great sword

**Encumbrance:** 2 (3)

**Customization Notes:** The Knight\'s Wealthy Virtue gives him a lot of
experience points, and so cannot be changed without effectively
recreating the character from scratch. Oath of Fealty can be swapped for
True Love and still be appropriate. In fact, both are so appropriate to
a knight that the troupe may allow you to take both, as the character
can still take three more points of Flaws. Note that the character
regards himself as superior to just about anyone, unless you change the
Major Personality Flaw, and doesn\'t have the Abilities to interact well
with equals.

The Priest

**Characteristics:** Int +1, Per +2, Pre +1, Com +2, Str 0, Sta 0, Dex
--1, Qik 0

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 33 (33)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Priest; Inspirational, Lesser Immunity
(lightning), Relic, Sense Holiness and Unholiness, Social Contacts
(minor clergy), Student of the Divine, Well-Traveled; Compassionate
(Major), Plagued by Angel; Clumsy, Vow of Celibacy

**Personality Traits:** Compassionate +3, Pious +3, Loyal +2

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:** Dodging: Init +0, Atk n/a, Def +2, Dam n/a

**Soak:** +0 (Stamina)

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Area Lore 5 (churches), Artes Liberales 2 (rhetoric),
Brawl 1 (dodging), Charm 5 (parishioners), Church Lore 3 (local
diocese), Civil and Canon Law 1 (regulations for the clergy), Dominion
Lore 3+2 (angels), Etiquette 3 (Church), Folk Ken 6 (people he knows
very well), Intrigue 1 (parishes), Latin 4 (the Bible), Leadership 3
(preaching), Living Language 5 (preaching), Sense Holiness and
Unholiness 4 (angels), Theology 2 (angelology)

**Equipment:** Priest\'s clothes, a missal.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Customization Notes:** The Priest could take another two Minor Flaws
and corresponding Virtues, if desired. He may be unaware of his
immunity, or being struck by lightning and remaining completely unharmed
may have been a central event in his past. If it happened, it should be.
The nature of his Lesser Immunity can easily be changed, and even
boosted to a Greater Immunity if you take two more Minor Flaws.

The Rogue

**Characteristics:** Int 0, Per +1, Pre 0, Com +1, Str --1, Sta 0, Dex
+4, Qik +4

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 20 (20)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Wanderer; Great Dexterity, Great Quickness,
Improved Characteristics (x2), Light Touch, Perfect Balance, Puissant
Legerdemain, Puissant Stealth; Avaricious (Major), Dark Secret;
Compulsion, Night Terrors

**Personality Traits:** Avaricious +6, Daring +2, Sociable +2

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:** Fist: Init +4, Atk +7, Def +7, Dam --1

**Soak:** 0 (Stamina)

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Area Lore 1 (rich people\'s homes), Athletics 3
(climbing), Awareness 3 (noticing whether he is observed), Brawl 3
(getting away), Charm 2 (people who think he\'s exciting), Folk Ken 1
(people in authority), Guile 1 (when caught red-handed), Legerdemain 5+2
(picking pockets), Native Language 5 (being polite), Stealth 5+2 (being
quiet)

**Equipment:** Clothes, secret stash of money that he never spends.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Customization Notes:** The Rogue\'s Dark Secret can be almost
anything, but is most likely to be a particularly vile crime that he
committed in the past, and now, probably, feels guilty about. The
Compulsion should be to commit some sort of minor criminal act, such as
thievery, or to take risks to prove he can. This character is
fundamentally fast and stealthy, although he can turn on the charm to a
certain extent. By moving the numbers in Characteristics and Abilities,
you can turn him into a charmer with some ability in stealth. Don\'t
forget to change the Great Characteristic and Puissant Ability Virtues
if you do this.

The Witch

**Characteristics:** Int +2, Per +2, Pre +1, Com +1, Str -1, Sta 0, Dex
+2, Qik 0

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 30 (30)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Wise One; Educated, Improved Characteristics,
Premonitions, Second Sight, Student of Magic, Wilderness Sense;
Compassionate (Major), Enemies; Nocturnal

**Personality Traits:** Compassionate +3, Sociable -1, Trusting --2

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:** Dodging: Init +0, Atk n/a, Def +0, Dam n/a

**Soak:** +0 (Stamina)

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Area Lore 3 (medicinal herbs), Artes Liberales 1
(astronomy), Athletics 1 (climbing), Awareness 1 (animals), Charm 3
(peasants), Chirurgy 4 (farm accidents), Divine Lore 1 (relics), Faerie
Lore 2 (curses), Folk Ken 3 (peasants), Guile 3 (clergy), Infernal Lore
1 (diabolists), Latin 4 (medical terms), Magic Lore 3+2 (regiones),
Medicine 5 (accidental poisonings), Native Language 5 (choosing words
carefully), Premonitions 3 (threats to others), Second Sight 3 (ghosts),
Survival 3 (near farmland), Wilderness Sense 3 (weather)

**Equipment:** Old but sturdy clothes.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Customization Notes:** The Witch\'s magical powers are far, far weaker
than a Hermetic magus\'s, but she doesn\'t have The Gift. She\'s an
excellent healer, and people might not believe that her healing
abilities are purely mundane. Intolerant clergy make good enemies, as do
magical or faerie beings she has annoyed, although in that case you
might want to change the Flaw to Plagued by Supernatural Entity or
Supernatural Nuisance. She can take another Major Flaw, or three more
Minor ones, along with corresponding Virtues.

Magus Templates

These templates are of a stereotypical member of each House, 25 years
old and just out of apprenticeship.

The asterisk in the Virtues list indicates the Virtue that the magus
gets free from his House. See page @@.

Bjornaer

**Characteristics:** Int +3, Per 0, Pre 0, Com --1, Str 0, Sta +1, Dex
0, Qik +1

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 25 (25)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Ways of the Forest;
Heartbeast\*, Inoffensive to Animals, Quiet Magic (x2), Subtle Magic;
Blatant Gift, Tormenting Master; Deficient Form (Ignem)

**Personality Traits:** Brave +2, Status-seeking +2, Obedient +1

**Reputations:** None.

**Combat:** Dodging: Init +1, Attack n/a, Defense +4, Damage n/a

**Soak:** +1

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Area Lore 1 (forests), Artes Liberales 1 (grammar),
Athletics 2 (endurance), Awareness 2 (people), Brawl 2 (dodge), Finesse
1 (targeting), Folk Ken 1 (hunters), Guile 1 (pretending to know less
than you do), Heartbeast 2 (changing into a wolf), Hunt 2 (small
animals), Latin 4 (Hermetic terms), Living Language 5 (talking about the
wilderness), Magic Theory 3 (Animal), Parma Magica 1 (Animal),
Penetration 1 (Muto), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (Bjornaer), Second Area
Lore 1 (forests), Survival 3 (forests)

**Arts:** Cr 0, In 1, Mu 10, Pe 3, Re 1; An 8, Aq 0, Au 0, Co 8, He 0,
Ig 0, Im 0, Me 0, Te 0, Vi 0

**Twilight Scars:** None

**Equipment:** Wizardly robes.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Spells Known:** *Transformation of the Ravenous Beast to the Torpid
Toad* (MuAn 25/+19)

*Agony of the Beast* (PeAn 15/+12)

*Circle of Beast Warding* (ReAn 5/+10)

*Viper\'s Gaze* (ReAn 15/+10)

*Eyes of the Cat* (MuCo(An) 5/+19)

*Gift of the Bear\'s Fortitude* (MuCo 25/+19)

*The Wound that Weeps* (PeCo 15/+12)

*Lifting the Dangling Puppet* (ReCo 15/+10)

**Customization Notes:** The Bjornaer is much more comfortable with
animals than with people, and may think of him or herself as just as
much animal as human. The combination of Blatant Gift and Inoffensive to
Animals means that she gets along better with animals than with people.
Ways of the Forest should be changed to a terrain appropriate to the
actual heartbeast; a wolf is assumed for the example. Both Major Flaws
can be changed freely, and while Deficient Form (Ignem) is very common
in House Bjornaer, there is no particular reason for your character to
have it. Note that Quiet and Subtle Magic allow the magus to cast in his
heartbeast form without any penalty.

Bonisagus

**Characteristics:** Int +5, Per 0, Pre 0, Com +1, Str 0, Sta 0, Dex 0,
Qik 0

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 25 (25)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Affinity with Auram,
Affinity with Creo, Book Learner, Free Study, Great Intelligence (x2),
Inventive Genius, Puissant Magic Theory\*, Secondary Insight; Favors,
Painful Magic; Driven (Minor), Weak Enchanter

**Personality Traits:** Brave --1, Driven +3, Studious +2

**Reputations:** None.

**Combat:** Dodging: Init +0, Attack n/a, Defense +0, Damage n/a

**Soak:** 0

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Artes Liberales 1 (logic), Awareness 2 (when working),
Charm 2 (equals), Concentration 3 (spell casting), Folk Ken 2 (magi),
Latin 4 (Hermetic technical terms), Magic Lore 1 (non-Hermetic magic),
Magic Theory 4+2 (Creo), Native Language 5 (educated talk), Order of
Hermes Lore 2 (great discoveries), Parma Magica 1 (Mentem), Penetration
1 (Auram), Teaching 3 (Hermetic Arts)

**Arts:** Cr 12, In 0, Mu 0, Pe 0, Re 3; An 0, Aq 0, Au 12, Co 4, He 0,
Ig 0, Im 0, Me 0, Te 0, Vi 0

**Twilight Scars:** None

**Equipment:** Wizardly robes.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Spells Known:** *Charge of the Angry Winds* (CrAu 15/+24)

*Clouds of Rain and Thunder* (CrAu 25/+24)

*Clouds of Summer Snow* (CrAu 25/+24)

*The Incantation of Lightning* (CrAu 35/+24)

*Purification of the Festering Wounds* (CrCo 20/+16)

**Customization Notes:** The Bonisagus is most likely Driven to make
some great discovery in magic. He or she is a so-called \'lab rat\', a
magus happier in his laboratory than in the outside world. However, the
favors he owes and his drive to discover are likely to push him out.
Similarly, enchanted items are very useful to him, but he is bad at
making them for himself. That also tends to drive him into stories. This
concept is built around the Virtues and the Driven Flaw; the other Flaws
can be changed easily. He can also take two additional Minor Flaws, or
make Driven Major, and take two additional Minor Virtues to balance
them. Similarly, the Arts in which the character has an Affinity can be
changed, but that also requires changing the spells he knows.

Criamon

**Characteristics:** Int +3, Per 0, Pre +2, Com --3, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex
0, Qik +1

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 25 (25)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Flexible Formulaic
Magic; The Enigma\*, Magic Sensitivity, Puissant Enigmatic Wisdom, Side
Effect, Study Bonus; Magic Addiction, Twilight Prone; Incomprehensible

**Personality Traits:** Enthusiastic +3, Friendly +2, Practical --3

**Reputations:** None.

**Combat:** Dodging: Init +1, Attack n/a, Defense +1, Damage n/a

**Soak:** +2

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Artes Liberales 1 (rhetoric), Charm 5 (educated people),
Concentration 3 (spell casting), Enigmatic Wisdom 3+2 (riddles), Folk
Ken 1 (educated people), Latin 4 (Enigmatic terms), Magic Sensitivity 2
(auras), Magic Theory 3 (Vim), Native Language 5 (long words), Order of
Hermes Lore 1 (mysteries), Parma Magica 1 (Mentem)

**Arts:** Cr 4, In 6, Mu 4, Pe 4, Re 4; An 0, Aq 0, Au 0, Co 0, He 0, Ig
0, Im 2, Me 1, Te 0, Vi 10

**Twilight Scars:** None (yet)

**Equipment:** Wizardly robes.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Spells Known:** *Phantom of the Talking Head* (CrIm 10/+8)

*Aura of Ennobled Presence* (MuIm 10/+8)

*Piercing the Faerie Veil* (InVi 20/+18)

*Piercing the Magical Veil* (InVi 20/+18) (see *Piercing the Faerie
Veil)*

*Unraveling the Fabric of Imaginem* (PeVi 20/+16)

*Wind of Mundane Silence* (PeVi 20/+16)

*Circular Ward Against Demons* (ReVi 20/+16)

**Customization Notes:** The Criamon does not have her maximum allowance
of Flaws, so could take an additional Major Flaw or three Minor Flaws,
with corresponding Virtues, if desired. Her Charm and Folk Ken scores
could be moved into other Abilities available in the first five years of
life (see the Detailed Character Creation rules, page @@), possibly also
moving her good Presence score as well.

Ex Miscellanea

**Characteristics:** Int +3, Per --1, Pre --1, Com 0, Str +4, Sta +4,
Dex --2, Qik --2

**Size:** +2

**Age:** 25 (25)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Giant Blood\*, Major
Magical Focus (stone); Affinity with Terram\*, Enduring Magic, Improved
Characteristics, Puissant Terram, Tough; Generous (Major), Necessary
Condition (touching stone)\*, Plagued by Supernatural Entity; Deficient
Auram

**Personality Traits:** Generous +6, Patient +3, Trusting +2, Vengeful
+2

**Reputations:** None.

**Combat:** Dodging: Init --2, Attack n/a, Defense +1, Damage n/a

Grappling: Init --2, Attack +2, Defense +2, Damage n/a

**Soak:** +7

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--7), --3 (8--14), --5 (15--21),
Incapacitated (22--28)

**Abilities:** Area Lore 3 (mountain trails), Artes Liberales 1
(astronomy), Brawl 3 (grappling), Concentration 3 (spellcasting),
Finesse 2 (Terram), Latin 4 (Hermetic usage), Magic Theory 3 (Terram),
Native Language 5 (being polite), Parma Magica 1 (Ignem), Penetration 2
(Terram), Survival 3 (mountains)

**Arts:** Cr 8, In 0, Mu 4, Pe 3, Re 5; An 0, Aq 0, Au 0, Co 1, He 0, Ig
0, Im 0, Me 0, Te 12+3, Vi 0

**Twilight Scars:** None

**Equipment:** Wizardly robes.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Spells Known:** *Wall of Protecting Stone* (CrTe 25/+35)

*The Crystal Dart* (Mu(Re)Te 10/+27)

*Rock of Viscid Clay* (MuTe 15/+27)

*Earth that Breaks No More* (MuTe 20/+27)

*Obliteration of the Metallic Barrier* (Pe(Re)Te 20/+22)

*The Earth\'s Carbuncle* (Re(Mu)Te 15/+27)

*Hands of the Grasping Earth* (Re(Mu)Te 15/+23)

**Customization Notes:** This Ex Miscellanea tradition grants the
Virtues Giant Blood and Affinity with Terram, and the Flaw Necessary
Condition: Touching Stone. The stone in question can be a piece of stone
worn on a belt, for example, but it must be at least the size of the
magus\'s hand (the magus has big hands). The magus doesn\'t have his
full allowance of Flaws, so you can take another Major Flaw, or three
more Minor, and corresponding Virtues.

Flambeau

**Characteristics:** Int +2, Per +1, Pre 0, Com --1, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex
0, Qik +1

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 25 (25)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Greater Immunity
(Fire), Major Magical Focus (Flames); Affinity with Creo, Affinity with
Ignem, Life Boost, Puissant Ignem\*; Enemies, Necessary Condition (must
clap his hands), Wrathful (Major)

**Personality Traits:** Brave +3, Wrathful +6, Thoughtful --2

**Reputations:** None.

**Combat:** Dodging: Init +1, Attack n/a, Defense +4, Damage n/a

**Soak:** +2

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Area Lore 2 (hiding places), Artes Liberales 1 (logic),
Athletics 2 (running), Awareness 3 (in combat), Brawl 2 (dodging), Folk
Ken 1 (people in authority over him), Guile 3 (claiming not to have done
something), Hermes Lore 1 (House Flambeau), Latin 4 (insults), Living
Language 5 (insults), Magic Theory 3 (Ignem), Parma Magica 1 (Mentem),
Penetration 2 (Ignem), Stealth 1 (entering buildings or rooms), Survival
1 (woods)

**Arts:** Cr 12, In 0, Mu 0, Pe 4, Re 5; An 0, Aq 0, Au 0, Co 0, He 0,
Ig 12+3, Im 0, Me 0, Te 1, Vi 0

**Twilight Scars:** None

**Equipment:** Wizardly robes, smelling slightly of smoke.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Spells Known:** *Palm of Flame* (CrIg 5/+41)

*Pilum of Fire* (CrIg 20/+41)

*Arc of Fiery Ribbons* (CrIg 25/+41)

*Ball of Abysmal Flame* (CrIg 35/+41)

*Circle of Encompassing Flame* (CrIg 35/+41)

**Customization Notes:** The Flambeau is very much a one-trick pony. He
can throw fire at opponents extremely effectively. His focused Arts and
Magical Focus mean that he has some Penetration even for powerful
spells. However, he is much weaker if he tries to do anything else.
Wrathful and Enemies can be swapped out for other Flaws with no trouble,
to break the stereotype a bit, as can his Greater Immunity. He can take
another Minor Flaw, and balancing Minor Virtue.

Guernicus

**Characteristics:** Int +3, Per +4, Pre +1, Com 0, Str 0, Sta 0, Dex
--2, Qik 0

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 25 (25)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Affinity with
Intellego, Clear Thinker, Great Perception, Hermetic Prestige\*,
Improved Characteristics, Puissant Intellego, Side Effect (lying is
hard); Curse of Venus, Restriction (no magic for Sun duration after
lying)

**Personality Traits:** Honest +3, Fair +2, Nervous around the opposite
sex +2

**Reputations:** Quaesitor (Hermetic) 3.

**Combat:** Dodging: Init +0, Attack n/a, Defense +2, Damage n/a

**Soak:** +0

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Artes Liberales 1 (logic), Awareness 3 (clues), Brawl 1
(dodging), Charm 2 (people you suspect), Code of Hermes 3 (the local
Tribunal), Concentration 1 (observing people or places), Folk Ken 4
(liars), Guile 2 (concealing investigations), Latin 4 (Hermetic terms),
Magic Theory 3 (Intellego), Native Language 5 (questions), Order of
Hermes Lore 1 (legal cases), Parma Magica 1 (Mentem)

**Arts:** Cr 0, In 12+3 (5), Mu 0, Pe 2, Re 0; An 0, Aq 0, Au 0, Co 5,
He 0, Ig 0, Im 6, Me 6, Te 0, Vi 0

**Twilight Scars:** None

**Equipment:** Wizardly robes.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Spells Known:** *Physician\'s Eye* (InCo 5/+20)

*Eyes of the Eagle* (InIm 25/+21)

*Summoning the Distant Image* (InIm 25/+21)

*Invisibility of the Standing Wizard* (PeIm 15/+8)

*Frosty Breath of the Spoken Lie* (InMe 20/ +21)

*Peering Into the Mortal Mind* (InMe 30/+21)

**Customization Notes:** If the Guernicus lies (says something she
believes to be untrue as if it were true), she cannot use any magic
until the sun next rises or sets. Anyone who wants to tell a lie in her
presence soon after she casts a spell (within two minutes or so) must
make a relevant Personality Trait check against an Ease Factor equal to
the magnitude of the spell cast. If the check fails, he cannot bring
himself to lie, although he can remain silent. The Guernicus could take
four more points of Flaws, and corresponding Virtues.

Jerbiton

**Characteristics:** Int +3, Per +1, Pre +1, Com +1, Str 0, Sta 0, Dex
+1, Qik 0

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 25 (25)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Gentle Gift; Free
Expression, Improved Characteristics, Privileged Upbringing, Puissant
Music\*, Venus\'s Blessing; Deficient Technique (Perdo), Necessary
Condition (singing); Susceptibility to Infernal Power

**Personality Traits:** Friendly +3, Brave +2, Studious +1

**Reputations:** None.

**Combat:** Dodging: Init +0, Attack n/a, Defense +0, Damage n/a

**Soak:** +0

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Artes Liberales 1 (music), Carouse 2 (maintaining
dignity), Charm 3 (the opposite sex), Code of Hermes 1 (dealing with
mundanes), Etiquette 2 (nobility), Folk Ken 2 (nobles), Guile 2 (fast
excuses), Latin 5 (musical terms), Magic Theory 3 (Imaginem), Music 4+2
(singing), Native Language 5 (noble style), Order of Hermes Lore 2
(Jerbiton), Parma Magica 1 (Mentem)

**Arts:** Cr 6, In 1, Mu 6, Pe 1, Re 6; An 0, Aq 0, Au 0, Co 5, He 0, Ig
0, Im 10, Me 0, Te 0, Vi 0

**Twilight Scars:** None

**Equipment:** Wizardly robes.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Spells Known:** *Phantasm of the Talking Head* (CrIm 10/+16)

*Phantasm of the Human Form* (CrIm 25/+16)

*Discern Own Illusions* (InIm 15/+11)

*Taste of the Spices and Herbs* (MuIm 5/+16)

*Aura of Ennobled Presence* (MuIm 10/+16)

*Notes of a Delightful Sound* (MuIm 10/+16)

*Disguise of the Transformed Image* (MuIm 15/+16)

*Illusion of Cool Flames* (PeIm 10/+6)

*Illusion of the Shifted Image* (ReIm 10/+16)

*Wizard\'s Sidestep* (ReIm 10/+16)

**Customization Notes:** The Jerbiton took Puissant Music as his free
House-related Virtue. He is designed as a social creature who sees
himself as an artist in music and magic. He can take up to three points
more of Flaws, with the corresponding Virtues. Note that he has the
Gentle Gift, and thus can interact with mundanes without any penalty.

Mercere

**Characteristics:** Int +2, Per 0, Pre 0, Com --1, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex
+1, Qik +1

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 25 (25)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Major Magical Focus
(Weather); Affinity with Auram, Cyclic Magic (Positive) --- Day,
Puissant Auram, Puissant Creo\*, Special Circumstances (during a storm);
Ambitious (Major), Difficult Longevity Ritual; Cyclic Magic (Negative)
--- Night

**Personality Traits:** Ambitious +6, Wanderer +3, Brave +2

**Reputations:** None.

**Combat:** Dodging: Init +1, Attack n/a, Defense +1, Damage n/a

**Soak:** +2

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Area Lore 3 (routes between settlements), Artes Liberales
1 (astronomy), Athletics 1 (hiking), Awareness 1 (weather signs), Hunt 2
(small game), Latin 4 (Hermetic terms), Magic Theory 3 (Auram), Native
Language 5 (talking to travelers), Parma Magica 1 (Ignem), Penetration 2
(Auram), Stealth 3 (in woodland), Survival 4 (in bad weather)

**Arts:** Cr 6+3, In 4, Mu 4, Pe 3, Re 5; An 0, Aq 0, Au 12+3, Co 2, He
0, Ig 0, Im 0, Me 2, Te 0, Vi 0

**Twilight Scars:** None

**Equipment:** Wizardly robes.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Spells Known:** *Jupiter\'s Resounding Blow* (CrAu 10/+26)

*Clouds of Rain and Thunder* (CrAu 25/+35)

*Clouds of Summer Snow* (CrAu 25/+35)

*Pull of the Skybound Winds* (CrAu 30/+26)

*Wings of the Soaring Wind* (Cr(Re)Au 30/+27)

**Customization Notes:** The Mercere can take another three points of
Flaws and as many points of Virtues. He is quite capable of traveling
alone, and probably prefers to do so. By moving scores from Hunt and
Stealth into social Abilities such as Charm, he can be made more likely
to travel with a group.

Merinita

**Characteristics:** Int +3, Per +1, Pre +1, Com +2, Str --1, Sta --1,
Dex --1, Qik --1

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 25 (25)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Strong Faerie Blood
(Undine); Deft Imaginem, Faerie Magic\*, Free Study, Puissant Imaginem,
Student of Faerie; Chaotic Magic, Plagued by Faerie; Faerie Upbringing

**Personality Traits:** Mercurial +3, Honest --2, Reliable --3

**Reputations:** None.

**Combat:** Dodging: Init --1, Attack n/a, Defense --1, Damage n/a

**Soak:** --1

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Artes Liberales 1 (rhetoric), Charm 2 (gaining trust),
Faerie Lore 3+2 (water fay), Faerie Magic 1 (illusions), Folk Ken 2
(what people will believe), Guile 5 (sustained lies), Latin 4 (Hermetic
terms), Magic Theory 3 (Imaginem), Native Language 5 (faeries),
Penetration 2 (Mentem), Parma Magica 1 (Mentem)

**Arts:** Cr 5, In 1, Mu 5, Pe 2, Re 5; An 0, Aq 0, Au 0, Co 1, He 0, Ig
0, Im 10+3, Me 5, Te 0, Vi 0

**Twilight Scars:** None

**Equipment:** Wizardly robes.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Spells Known:** *Phantasmal Animal* (CrIm 20/+17)

*Phantasm of the Human Form* (CrIm 25/+17)

*Image Phantom* (MuIm 20/+17)

*Veil of Invisibility* (PeIm 20/+14)

*Wizard\'s Sidestep* (ReIm 10/+17)

*Panic of the Trembling Heart* (CrMe 15/+9)

*The Call to Slumber* (ReMe 10/+9)

**Customization Notes:** The Merinita can take another three points of
Flaws and as many Virtues. The type of Strong Faerie Blood can also be
changed easily. They might look younger than 25, due to the influence of
Strong Faerie Blood, but need not.

Tremere

**Characteristics:** Int +3, Per --2, Pre 0, Com 0, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex
0, Qik +1

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 25 (25)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Elemental Magic; Book
Learner, Cautious Sorcerer, Latent Magical Ability, Minor Magical Focus
(certamen)\*, Skilled Parens; Ambitious (Major), Weak Magic Resistance;
Susceptibility to Divine Power

**Personality Traits:** Ambitious +6, Authoritarian +3, Respectful +3,
Brave +2

**Reputations:** None.

**Combat:** Dodging: Init +1, Attack n/a, Defense +1, Damage n/a

**Soak:** +2

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Artes Liberales 1 (arithmetic), Charm 2 (magi), Code of
Hermes 1 (certamen law), Etiquette 2 (Hermetic), Finesse 2 (Terram),
Folk Ken 3 (magi), Guile 2 (lying to underlings), Intrigue 2 (Hermetic
politics), Latin 4 (Hermetic terms), Leadership 3 (running
institutions), Magic Theory 3 (Creo), Native Language 5 (giving orders),
Order of Hermes Lore 2 (Tremere), Parma Magica 1 (Mentem), Penetration 3
(Ignem)

**Arts:** Cr 5, In 5, Mu 5, Pe 5, Re 5; An 0, Aq 8 (3), Au 9 (1), Co 0,
He 0, Ig 9 (1), Im 0, Me 1, Te 9 (1), Vi 0

**Twilight Scars:** None

**Equipment:** Wizardly robes.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Spells Known:** *Circling Winds of Protection* (Cr(Re)Au 20/+16)

*Rain of Stones* (MuAu(Te) 20/+16)

*Pilum of Fire* (CrIg 20/+16)

*Soothe the Raging Flames* (PeIg 20/+16)

*Seal the Earth* (CrTe 15/+16)

*The Miner\'s Keen Eye* (InTe 20/+16)

*Earth that Breaks No More* (MuTe 20/+16)

*Pit of the Gaping Earth* (PeTe 15/+16)

**Customization Notes:** The Tremere can take three more points of
Flaws, and a similar number of Virtues. At the moment, he is a social
and political creature, but the score in one of those Abilities could be
moved into a Martial Ability to make him more of a fighter. Elemental
Magic makes it difficult to move Art scores around. Initially, he was
assigned scores of Aq 3, Au 6, Ig 6, and Te 6. Aquam received an
additional 33 experience points (from Auram, Ignem and Terram), for a
final total of 39 and a score of 8 (3), and each of the other Arts
received an additional 25 experience points, for a final total of 46 and
a score of 9 (1).

Tytalus

**Characteristics:** Int +4, Per --1, Pre 0, Com 0, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex
+1, Qik +1

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 25 (25)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Confidence Score:** 2 (5)

**Virtues and Flaws:** The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Life-Linked Spontaneous
Magic; Great Intelligence, Improved Characteristics, Life Boost,
Piercing Gaze, Self-Confident\*; Painful Magic, Tormenting Master; Weak
Parens

**Personality Traits:** Argumentative +3, Brave +2, Trusting --2

**Reputations:** None.

**Combat:** Dodging: Init +1, Attack n/a, Defense +4, Damage n/a

**Soak:** +2

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Artes Liberales 1 (logic), Awareness 2 (ambushes),
Bargain 2 (luxuries), Brawl 3 (grappling), Concentration 2
(spellcasting), Guile 2 (spur of the moment), Intrigue 2 (conspiracies),
Latin 4 (Hermetic terms), Leadership 2 (long-time followers), Magic
Theory 3 (Mentem), Native Language 5 (arguing), Parma Magica 1 (Mentem)

**Arts:** Cr 5, In 5, Mu 0, Pe 0, Re 5; An 0, Aq 0, Au 0, Co 0, He 0, Ig
0, Im 0, Me 9, Te 0, Vi 0

**Twilight Scars:** None

**Equipment:** Wizardly robes.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Spells Known:** *Pains of the Perpetual Worry* (CrMe 20/+16)

*Posing the Silent Question* (InMe 20/+16)

*Trust of Childlike Faith* (PeMe 10/+11)

*Aura of Rightful Authority* (ReMe 20+16)

*Scent of Peaceful Slumber* (ReMe 20/+16)

**Customization Notes:** The Tytalus can take up to three more points of
Flaws, and a similar number of Virtues.

Verditius

**Characteristics:** Int +3, Per 0, Pre 0, Com 0, Str --3, Sta +1, Dex
+1, Qik 0

**Size:** --2

**Age:** 25 (25)

**Decrepitude:** 0

**Warping Score:** 0 (0)

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Affinity with Craft
(metalsmith), Affinity with Craft (stonemason), Affinity with Terram,
Faerie Blood (Dwarf), Puissant Craft (metalsmith), Puissant Craft
(stonemason), Puissant Terram, Verditius Magic\*; Dwarf, Weak
Spontaneous Magic; Difficult Spontaneous Magic

**Personality Traits:** Disciplined +3, Perfectionist +3, Spontaneous
--2

**Reputations:** None.

**Combat:** Dodging: Init +0, Attack n/a, Defense +0, Damage n/a

**Soak:** +1

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--3), --3 (4--6), --5 (7--9), Incapacitated
(10--12)

**Abilities:** Artes Liberales 1 (geometry), Awareness 3 (flaws in stone
and metal work), Athletics 2 (endurance), Craft (metalsmith) 5+3 (iron),
Craft (stonemason) 4+3 (decorations), Faerie Lore 2 (dwarfs), Latin 4
(Hermetic terms), Magic Theory 3 (Terram), Native Language 5 (talking
about metal and stone), Parma Magica 1 (Terram), Philosophiae 1 (natural
philosophy)

**Arts:** Cr 7, In 3, Mu 5, Pe 3, Re 5; An 0, Aq 0, Au 0, Co 0, He 0, Ig
0, Im 0, Me 0, Te 12+3, Vi 0

**Twilight Scars:** None

**Equipment:** Wizardly robes.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Spells Known:** *Seal the Earth* (CrTe 15/+23)

*Touch of Midas* (CrTe 20/+25)

*Wall of Protecting Stone* (CrTe 25/+23)

*The Crystal Dart* (Mu(Re)Te 10/+21)

*Edge of the Razor* (MuTe 20/+21)

*Pit of the Gaping Earth* (PeTe 15/+19)

*Hands of the Grasping Earth* (Re(Mu)Te 15/+21)

**Customization Notes:** The Verditius can take another three Minor
Flaws, or one Major, and balancing Virtues. In addition, her Craft
Abilities can be changed for different crafts without changing the
concept much. Finally, not everyone descended from dwarfs is as small as
they are, so that Flaw could be swapped for others without affecting the
character on a fundamental level.

Detailed Character Creation

The first step in creating a new character from scratch is creating a
character concept. Your magus might be a fire wizard, a magical spy, or
a magus desperate to get away from the diabolism practiced by his
parens. A companion might be a woodsman with supernatural powers, a
Muslim scholar exploring western Europe, or a werewolf seeking a cure
for his curse. A grog can be any type of warrior, or a member of the
covenant staff, such as a washerwoman, butler, or stablehand.

Detailed Character Creation Summary

1\. Pick a character concept.

2\. **Hermetic Magi Only:** Pick a House. (See page @@)

3\. Pick Virtues and Flaws. Minor Virtues and Flaws are worth one point,
Major Virtues and Flaws three points each.

Grogs: Up to three Minor Flaws, and the same number of Minor Virtues.

Companions and Magi: Up to ten points of Flaws, and the same number of
points of Virtues.

4\. Buy Characteristics. Start with 7 points. See page @@ or @@.

5\. Early Childhood. Seventy five experience points in Native Language
(normally granting a score of 5), and 45 experience points spread
between Area Lore (for the place or places the character is growing up),
Athletics, Awareness, Brawl, Charm, Folk Ken, Guile, Living Language
(other than the character\'s native language), Stealth, Survival, and
Swim.

6\. Later life. 15 experience points per year (until apprenticeship for
magi), spread between any Abilities the character can learn, based on
the Virtues and Flaws he has. Characters with the Wealthy Major Virtue
get 20 experience points per year, those with the Poor Major Flaw get
10.

7\. **Hermetic Magi Only:** Apprenticeship. Divide 240 experience points
between Hermetic Arts and any non-Supernatural Abilities (or
Supernatural Abilities, if the magus has the relevant Virtue). Take 120
levels of spells, of no higher level than Technique + Form +
Intelligence + Magic Theory +3. Apply any relevant Virtues and Flaws
when calculating this total.

8\. **Hermetic Magi Only (Optional):** Years after apprenticeship.
Divide 30 points per year between experience points in Arts, experience
points in Abilities, and levels of spells.

8\. Personality. Pick a few words to describe your character, and assign
a number between +3 and --3 to each.

Grogs should all have a score in Loyal.

Warriors should all have a score in Brave.

9\. Reputation. If the character has a Virtue or Flaw granting a
Reputation, decide on the reputation.

10\. **Companions and Magi Only:** Confidence. Your character starts
with a Confidence Score of 1 and 3 Confidence Points, unless he has a
Virtue or Flaw modifying this.

11\. Equipment. Give your character equipment he could reasonably have
acquired and retained.

Once you have a concept, decide whether the character is a magus,
companion, or grog. It is obvious if the character is a magus; he has
The Gift and has been trained in Hermetic magic. Before creating a magus
character, you should have an understanding of the magic rules. Without
at least a basic grasp of the way that magic works, you may make choices
that will weaken your initiate magus and curtail his potential for
future development. It\'s probably best to use one of the templates for
your first magus.

If the character is not a magus, but is intended to be a central
character in the saga, he is a companion. If he is intended to be a bit
part, he is a grog. A stablehand intended to be a central character is a
companion, and a woodsman with one or two minor magical powers might
well be a grog. The rules for character creation differ slightly between
the three character types, but they are basically the same. However,
there are enough separate steps for magi to make it worth treating them
separately.

Starting Character Age

The detailed character creation rules allow you to create characters of
any age. This is obviously very useful for storyguides, but it raises
the question of the appropriate age for new player characters.

The first thing to bear in mind is that a character over the age of 35
must make aging rolls (see page @@) before the game begins. It is
possible for such a character to die of old age before play, although if
that happens you can always go back to the previous year.

The second issue is that older characters are more powerful than younger
ones. This is particularly marked for magi, who gain experience points
and spell levels more quickly once they are out of apprenticeship and no
longer need to spend time serving their masters.

The final issue is that older characters take longer to create, because
there are more experience points to allocate.

The troupe or storyguide should make a decision on starting ages,
bearing these factors in mind. There are a few guidelines worth
following, however.

First, new players should create magi who are just out of
apprenticeship. Magi have a lot of choices, and until you have played
the game a bit you won\'t know which choices suit your playing style.

Second, in most troupes all magi should be approximately the same number
of years out of apprenticeship. Actual ages are relatively unimportant,
as magical abilities tend to overshadow mundane. If you decide not to do
this, it should be because the whole troupe wants to play in that sort
of saga, not because one player has a cool concept for an older magus.

Third, it\'s a good idea to create companions at a fairly young age
(under 30), so that they have several years of play in them. The
importance of this varies depending on the speed of your saga (see page
@@), but an old companion runs the risk of dying of old age before he\'s
been played a dozen times.

Finally, grogs can be created at any age, and probably should be.
Grizzled veterans and eager novices make equally fine concepts, and even
characters partially crippled by old age can contribute to stories set
at the covenant.

Child Characters

Creating children using these rules requires the application of a bit of
common sense. Abilities can be generated and treated as normal, but a
seven-year-old child is not going to be stronger than most adults, even
if she has Strength +3. Similarly, some Virtues and Flaws will only
become applicable as the child ages, rather than starting out usable.

To generate a child, use the normal rules, and then modify all
Characteristics as follows:

**Age Modifier Size Modifier**

6-7 --4 --2

8-9 --3 --2

10-11 --2 --2

12-13 --1 --1

14+ None None

Much more information about playing child characters is provided in
*Apprentices,* including how to handle Virtues and Flaws and how they
change as the character ages. If you do not have access to that book,
use your best judgement.

Magi Only: Hermetic House

The next step in creating a Hermetic magus is choosing his House. The
twelve Houses are described starting on page @@, and summarized in the
nearby table. Membership in a House grants a particular benefit at
character creation, which is listed in the table. A magus can only be a
member of one House.

Example: Darius

Niall is creating an experienced magus for use in a new saga. He decides
on the name \'Darius\', and his concept is a scary-looking magus who
specializes in Perdo magic and in hunting down the enemies of the Order.
Looking at the Houses, Flambeau and Tytalus both look appropriate, but
Puissant Art (Perdo) fits the concept better than Self-Confident, so he
goes with House Flambeau. Darius is now Darius of Flambeau.

Hermetic Houses Summary

The Hermetic Houses are described in more detail starting on page @@.
Members of each House get a particular benefit at character creation,
listed in the following table.

**House Type Description Benefit**

Bjornaer Mystery Cult Magi who are animals as well as humans. Heartbeast
(page @@), beginning score of 1 in Heartbeast Ability.

Bonisagus True Lineage Divided between researchers and politicians
Puissant Magic Theory (researchers) or Puissant Intrigue (politicians)

Criamon Mystery Cult Mystical philosophers and masters of riddles The
Enigma (page @@), beginning score of 1 in Enigmatic Wisdom.

Ex Miscellanea Societas Many magi from different traditions, not all
fully Hermetic A free Minor Hermetic Virtue, a free Major non-Hermetic
Virtue, and a compulsory Major Hermetic Flaw, representing the
particular tradition within the House. These Virtues and Flaws are in
addition to the normal allowance.

Flambeau Societas Martial masters of fire and destruction Puissant Perdo
or Puissant Ignem

Guernicus True Lineage Investigators, lawyers, and mediators Hermetic
Prestige

Jerbiton Societas Nobles, scholars, and artists A Minor Virtue relating
to scholarship, arts, or mundane interaction.

Mercere True Lineage Messengers of the Order Puissant Creo or Puissant
Muto. Note that unGifted Redcaps are created as companions, and take the
Redcap Major Status Virtue. Gifted Redcaps take the Hermetic Magus
Status Virtue, and do not take the Redcap Major Status Virtue.

Merinita Mystery Cult Faerie magi Faerie Magic (page @@), beginning
score of 1 in Faerie Magic. Any magus in this House without a
faerie-related Virtue or Flaw has a Warping Point, inflicted to allow
initiation into the Mystery.

Tremere True Lineage A hierarchical and disciplined House Minor Magical
Focus (certamen)

Tytalus Societas Magi who thrive on conflict of any sort Self Confident

Verditius Mystery Cult Crafters of enchanted items Verditius Magic (page
@@)

Virtues and Flaws

As many Virtues and Flaws deal with the character\'s place in the story,
the rules for them differ the most between the character types.

All characters must take a Social Status. There are a number of default
Social Statuses that cost no points; see page @@. In particular, all
Hermetic magi take the Social Status Hermetic Magus, which costs no
points. No other characters may take this Status, because they are not,
after all, Hermetic magi.

Grogs are somewhat limited in their choice of Virtues and Flaws, to
ensure that they remain minor characters. They may have up to three
points of Flaws, and a corresponding number of Virtues. Grogs should
have only Minor Virtues and Flaws. In addition, grogs may not have The
Gift (having The Gift makes you an important character), and may not
have Story Flaws, as those Flaws make characters central to stories, and
that is not the role of the grogs.

Companions may, in principle, choose any Virtues and Flaws. They may
have up to ten points of Flaws, and a corresponding number of points of
Virtues. Major Virtues and Flaws are worth three points each, Minor
Virtues and Flaws are worth one point each.

Companions who do not have The Gift may not choose Hermetic Virtues or
Flaws. Companions may have The Gift, and thus take Hermetic Virtues or
Flaws. However, this should be extremely unusual; the main reason for
creating such a companion is that you want to play through the
apprenticeship of a magus. The Gift is, however, free, even if taken by
a companion. Bear in mind that, unless the character can get access to
magical training, it is almost entirely a Flaw, because of its effects
on social interactions.

Mythic Companions get more Virtues for their Flaws, as described in the
rules on page @@.

Like companions, magi may take up to ten points of Flaws, and the same
number of points of Virtues. Major Virtues and Flaws cost three points
each, Minor ones one point. All magi must have The Gift. Without it,
they cannot work magic, and thus cannot be magi. In addition, all magi
should have at least one Hermetic Flaw. Nobody fits perfectly into
Hermetic theory.

The rules for taking Virtues and Flaws are summarized in the Virtues and
Flaws chapter, on page @@.

Choosing Virtues and Flaws

There are a *lot* of Virtues and Flaws available in this game, and it
may be difficult to decide what to choose. The first thing to remember
is that you do not need to choose the maximum number of Flaws.

Every player should consider Personality Flaws, and Story Flaws for
companions and magi, as these make the game more engaging and enjoyable
for you by telling the rest of the troupe what sort of stories you want
to experience with the character. They do not hinder your character, but
rather get them involved in enjoyable plots.

Most Virtues and Flaws are not necessary for any concept, even if the
name suggests that they might be. For example, a pagan character does
not need to have the Pagan Flaw --- the Flaw indicates that their
religion creates stories or shapes their personality, and that might not
be your plan for the character. This means that, in general, you can
pick Virtues and Flaws that look appropriate, and do not need to worry
that you have missed something vital by not checking all the others.

There are two exceptions. One is that a character must have a Virtue to
buy Academic, Arcane, Martial, or Supernatural Abilities at character
creation. Educated, Arcane Lore, and Warrior, respectively, are the
easiest options for the first three groups, although other Virtues (and
some Flaws) also grant access to some of these Abilities. In most cases,
access each Supernatural Ability is granted by a separate Virtue.

The second concerns social status. If you want your character to be a
knight, with all the social standing that implies, you must take the
Knight Social Status. On the other hand, you do not need that Virtue to
be an armored and mounted warrior (although you would need Warrior or
another Virtue that gives you access to Martial Abilities). In most
cases, social status does not define the way that other members of the
covenant see you, so if your character is not concerned about wider
society, you do not need to worry about this.

Finally, a lot of the Virtues and Flaws are very specialized, to support
particular types of character found in Mythic Europe. You can safely
ignore these, until you decide that you want to play that sort of
character.

Quick and Easy Virtues and Flaws

If you want to get started really quickly, use the following highly
simplified guidelines.

Grogs: Take a Minor Personality Flaw that reflects how you want to play
the character. Social Status is Covenfolk. Take Warrior for a grog who
fights, Educated for a grog who is educated, Arcane Lore for a grog who
knows about the supernatural, and Puissant Ability in the character's
specialty for any other type of character.

All Companions: Take a Major Personality or Story Flaw that reflects the
types of stories you want your character to be involved in. Social
Status is Covenfolk.

Martial Companions: Take Warrior, and Puissant and Affinity with the
same Martial Ability.

Learned Companions: Take Educated, and either Puissant with two Academic
Abilities, or Puissant and Affinity with the same Academic Ability.

Social Companions: Take any one of Gossip, Piercing Gaze, Social
Contacts, Well-Traveled, or Venus Blessing. Take Puissant with two
Social Abilities.

Magical Companion: Take one Minor Supernatural Virtue that grants a
Supernatural Ability, and Puissant and Affinity with that Ability.

Magus: Take a Major Personality or Story Flaw that reflects the types of
stories you want your character to be involved in, and Deficient Form in
a Form that you are not interested in. Social Status is Hermetic Magus.
Choose a Minor Magical Focus that does not rely on your Deficient Form.
Choose one Technique that overlaps with your Minor Magical Focus, and
take Puissant and Affinity in it. Choose one Form that overlaps with
your Minor Magical Focus, and take Puissant in it.

Example: Darius of Flambeau

Niall starts by looking for appropriate Flaws to fit his concept. Driven
seems like a good Personality Flaw; Darius cannot help hunting down
enemies of the Order at all times. Similarly, those activities are
likely to produce Enemies, and Niall picks a Renounced magus and his
cronies to be the enemies in question. Blatant Gift fits well with the
scary image Niall wants, and he didn\'t imagine the character being able
to interact much with mundanes anyway. That\'s three Major Flaws, so
nine points already. Blatant Gift is a Hermetic Flaw, so that
requirement is met. Finally, Niall takes Disfigured (facial burns) as a
Minor Flaw, reinforcing the image and giving him ten points of Flaws.

Then it\'s time to buy good stuff. As a magus, Darius already has The
Gift and Hermetic Magus, and Puissant Art (Perdo) came free as a
Flambeau. Niall takes Affinity with Perdo to back up Darius\'s
specialty. He decides that Darius has done his job well, so he takes
Hermetic Prestige to reflect his reputation in the Order. Hunting magi
is a very dangerous game, so he also takes Premonitions and Second
Sight, making it hard to take Darius by surprise. Similarly, shooting
first is an advantage, so he takes Fast Caster. That\'s five Minor
Virtues, leaving Darius with five points to spend. Niall has a look at
Major Virtues, and decides that Flawless Magic will be extremely useful.
It will let him cast spells more quickly, and with higher Penetration,
which is a very good thing when facing other magi. That uses another
three points, but he still has two Minor Virtues to buy. He chooses
Strong-Willed and Enduring Constitution, which fit the image and provide
a bit more breadth.

Characteristics

Characteristics are bought on the following table. You start with seven
points to spend. All characters buy Characteristics in the same way.

For Hermetic magi, you should note that Intelligence is central to
Hermetic laboratory work, and thus magi should seriously consider taking
a positive score in it. Similarly, Stamina is very important for
spellcasting, and so a negative score there is best avoided.
Communication is vital if you want your character to write good books.

**Score Cost**

+3 6

+2 3

+1 1

0 0

--1 Gain 1

--2 Gain 3

--3 Gain 6

Example: Darius of Flambeau

Niall starts by giving Darius an Intelligence of +3, spending six of his
points right away. Following on with the idea that Darius is hard to
surprise and good at hunting, he spends the seventh point on a
Perception of +1. However, he doesn\'t want everything else to be zero.
Fortunately, the concept practically demands a negative score in
Presence, so Niall drops that to --3, and Communication to --1, giving
him seven more points to play with.

Stamina is the other score most useful for magi, so Niall makes a
deliberate decision to leave it at zero. The character will be more
interesting if he has strengths in other areas, he thinks. Instead, he
buys Quickness +2 (good for dodging), Strength +2 (he can hit hard), and
Dexterity +1 (making him better than average in combat). It looks like
Darius will occasionally use physical combat, which makes sense; steel
can get through Magic Resistance without any trouble.

Abilities

Abilities represent a character\'s learned abilities. For grogs and
companions they are acquired in two blocks: early childhood, and later
life. For magi, there are two more periods to consider: apprenticeship,
and life as a magus after that.

Your character\'s age determines the maximum score she can have in any
Ability at character creation, although some Virtues raise this limit.
These limits do not apply to characters in play, and there is no cap on
Abilities during play. In practice, most Abilities will not rise above
10, but there may be exceptions.

**Age Maximum Ability**

under 30 5

30--35 6

36--40 7

41--45 8

46+ 9

Early Childhood

In the first five years of life, characters gain 75 experience points in
their native language (see page @@ for the Language Ability), which
normally gives them a score of 5, and 45 experience points to divide
between Area Lore (for the place or places the character is growing up),
Athletics, Awareness, Brawl, Charm, Folk Ken, Guile, Living Language
(other than the character\'s native language), Stealth, Survival, and
Swim. You do not need to put points into all of these Abilities; choose
the ones that best fit your conception of the character. This represents
what the character picks up as she plays as a child.

Sample Childhoods

The following Ability packages can be taken to speed up character
generation. Each represents a particular sort of childhood. Note that
you can spend the 45 experience points for yourself, as well.

**Athletic Childhood:** Athletics 2, Brawl 2, Native Language 5, Swim 2

**Exploring Childhood:** Area Lore 2, Athletics 1, Awareness 1, Native
Language 5, Stealth 1, Survival 2

**Mischievous Childhood:** Brawl 2, Guile 2, Native Language 5, Stealth
2

**Social Childhood:** Charm 2, Folk Ken 2, Guile 2, Native Language 5

**Traveling Childhood:** Area A Lore 1, Area B Lore 1, Folk Ken 2,
Living Language 1, Native Language 5, Survival 2

Later Life

After early childhood, the character gains 15 experience points per
year, which may be placed in any Abilities, as long as the character has
a Virtue that permits her to learn those Abilities. Academic, Arcane,
and Martial Abilities require a Virtue, as do Supernatural Abilities.

Characters with the Wealthy Virtue get 20 experience points per year,
while characters with the Poor Flaw get 10 experience points per year.
Note that only companions can take this Virtue or Flaw.

Example: Darius of Flambeau

Darius has a number of free Abilities from his Virtues, so Niall notes
them first: Premonitions 1, Second Sight 1, Mastery of All Spells 1

The next issue is his early childhood. Niall chooses German as Darius\'s
native language, and, at this point, Uwe as his original name, so that
gives him German 5. He then spends 15 exp on Bavaria Lore 2, 15 exp on
Awareness 2, and 15 exp on Folk Ken 2, bringing Uwe/Darius to the age of
5.

Now he needs to decide when the boy became an apprentice, and he picks
10 as a nice, round number. He has 75 experience points to spend from
those five years, and he spends 15 exp on Brawl 2, 15 exp on Guile 2, 5
exp on Athletics 1, 5 exp on Concentration 1, 5 exp on Etiquette 1, 5
exp on Intrigue 1, 5 exp on Leadership 1, 5 exp on Stealth 1, 5 exp on
Survival 1, and 5 exp on Swim 1. That leaves him with 5 experience
points, which he decides to spend on Order of Hermes Lore 1. It\'s a
general Ability, so he can, and he rationalizes the decision by assuming
that his future master took him to the covenant some time before his
apprenticeship actually began.

Advancement Table

**Art Ability**

**Score To buy To raise To buy To raise**

1 1 1 5 5

2 3 2 15 10

3 6 3 30 15

4 10 4 50 20

5 15 5 75 25

6 21 6 105 30

7 28 7 140 35

8 36 8 180 40

9 45 9 225 45

10 55 10 275 50

11 66 11 330 55

12 78 12 390 60

13 91 13 455 65

14 105 14 525 70

15 120 15 600 75

16 136 16 680 80

17 153 17 765 85

18 171 18 855 90

19 190 19 950 95

20 210 20 1050 100

To buy: The number of experience points required to raise a score from
zero to that number.

To raise: The number of experience points required to raise a score by
one point to that number.

Magus Only --- Apprenticeship

The fifteen years of apprenticeship give the character 240 experience
points, and 120 levels of spells. These experience points can be spent
on Arts or Abilities, including Arcane, Academic, and Martial Abilities.
Note that magi can only spend experience points on Arcane, Academic and
Martial Abilities before apprenticeship if they have a Virtue which
allows them to do so. A sensible division is to spend 120 experience
points on Abilities and 120 on Arts.

Magi must have the following minimum Abilities: Parma Magica 1, Magic
Theory 1, Latin 1. Characters with lower scores would not be admitted to
the Order. A character without a Latin score of least 4 and an Artes
Liberales score of at least 1 is unable to read the books of the Order.
This will seriously weaken the character relative to other magi, and you
should be aware of this before designing such a character. A character
with a Latin score of less than 5 cannot write books, which may also be
important. A Magic Theory score of below 3 is weak, and, in particular,
means that the magus cannot set up his own laboratory. Very few magi
have a score in Parma Magica over 1 immediately after apprenticeship, as
this Ability is normally the last thing taught. Indeed, the magus is not
taught the final secret to raising a Parma until after he has sworn the
Oath. Magi should also seriously consider putting points into Code of
Hermes, Concentration, Finesse, Order of Hermes Lore, Penetration, and
Profession (Scribe).

Hermetic Magi Recommended Minimum Abilities

Artes Liberales 1

Latin 4

Magic Theory 3

Parma Magica 1 (should be no higher if the magus is just out of
apprenticeship)

Total cost: 90 experience points

Do not forget that casting totals add a Technique and Form together, and
that you will get a higher total by splitting experience between a
Technique and a Form than by putting all the experience points in one or
the other.

The highest level spell you can learn is equal to Technique + Form +
Intelligence + Magic Theory +3, where the Technique and Form are the
Technique and Form of the spell in question. If the spell has requisites
(see page @@), they apply to this total as well. This is the appropriate
Lab Total, assuming an aura modifier of +3, and thus any Virtues and
Flaws your character has apply to this total if they would apply to a
Lab Total in play.

Example: Darius of Flambeau

Spending the apprenticeship XP is fairly easy. Niall spends 50 exp for
Latin 4, 50 exp on Magic Theory 4, 30 exp on Artes Liberales 3, 5 exp on
Finesse 1, 15 exp on Penetration 2, 5 exp on Profession --- Scribe 1, 5
exp on Chirurgy 1, 5 exp on Faerie Lore 1, 5 exp on Infernal Lore 1, 5
exp on Philosophiae 1, and 5 exp on Magic Lore 1

Then he looks at Hermetic Arts. He has 60 experience points left. He
spends 37 points on Perdo, which his affinity turns into 56 points, so
that he has Perdo 10 (1), and a bonus of +3 from Puissant. Then he puts
almost all of the rest into Creo and Corpus: 15 exp on Creo 5, 3 exp on
Corpus 2.

Darius adds 11 to his Technique + Form to determine the highest level
spell he can learn (his Magic Theory specialty in "inventing spells"
applies). He chooses to take all Perdo spells, selecting *The Wound that
Weeps* (PeCo 15), *Dust to Dust* (PeCo 15), *Parching Wind* (PeAq 20),
*Soothe the Raging Flames* (PeIg 20), *Veil of Invisibility* (PeIm 20),
*Calm the Motion of the Heart* (PeMe 15), and *Loss of But a Moment's
Memory* (PeMe 15). Because of his Flawless Magic Virtue, Darius has a
Mastery Score of one in each spell, and thus Niall has to choose a
special ability for each.

Finally, just before Gauntlet, he spends his last 5 exp on Parma Magica
1.

Magus Only --- After Apprenticeship

If you want to generate a magus who is some time out of apprenticeship,
the rules change again. You might want to wait until you are familiar
with the game system before doing this, however. There are a lot of
options and considerations, which could easily seem overwhelming.

For every year, the magus gets 30 points. Each point can be an
experience point in an Art or Ability or one level of spell. The maximum
spell level a magus may know is limited as before. Thus, a magus who is
20 years out of apprenticeship could have a highest Art of 15, while a
magus 120 years out of apprenticeship might have a highest Art of 40.

Of course, you may not want your experienced magus to have spent all his
time studying Abilities, Arts and spells. If you wish to have your magus
engage in other lab activities (such as creating items, enchanting
familiars, and in particular creating Longevity Rituals) you will need
to know more about the circumstances in which he has been working. These
are ultimately up to the storyguide, but a typical situation might be as
follows:

1\. The magus\' covenant (for Aging rolls) gives a Living Conditions
modifier of +1 (see Aging, page @@)

2\. The magus\' lab is of only average quality, giving a modifier to Lab
Totals of 0.

3\. The covenant has a Magic Aura of 3.

4\. The magus may use a maximum number of pawns per year equal to Magic
Theory x 5, of the Arts required. It is not possible to accumulate pawns
from year to year, because this number already represents vis the magus
has saved while studying from books and inventing spells.

Statistics for familiars and apprentices should be agreed with the
storyguide, if required.

For each season that your magus spends working on a lab project, the
character loses 10 points from the yearly 30 experience points, to a
minimum of 0 if three or four seasons are spent on lab work. Thus it is
most cost effective to have the magus engage in a full year of lab work
at a time. It is suggested that you advance your magus year by year,
spending several on study, then taking years out to do lab work as the
character\'s statistics reach appropriate levels.

Older magi can learn spells more quickly than these guidelines suggest.
You may therefore want to use these rules to have a magus learn spells
as a lab project if you are advancing him more than forty years or so
beyond apprenticeship.

Remember that you should also make aging rolls for the character each
year from the age of 35. Thus you will probably want your magus to have
acquired a Longevity Ritual (see page @@) by then. Some skilled magi
offer their services creating Longevity Rituals for others, and you may
decide that your character has bargained for one such ritual, especially
if you are not interested in studying the Arts of Creo or Corpus. The
precise details of such bargains and the bonus given by the resulting
ritual should be agreed with the storyguide.

*Magi of Hermes* contains 15 magi detailed with full statistics
immediately after apprenticeship and every 15 years thereafter,
including details of any spells they invented or magic items they
created. These can serve as a source of ideas, or be used as-is in the
saga, even as player characters.

Example: Darius of Flambeau

Darius will be out of apprenticeship when the saga starts, so Niall
takes him further. For the eight years from 26 to 33, inclusive, he just
lumps all the experience points together. This gives him 240 experience
points to spend in various ways. First, he spends 25 exp raising Parma
Magica to 3, as a magus-hunter needs decent Magic Resistance. Then he
spends 5 exp on Great Weapon 1, and gives Darius a spear. Next, he
spends 88 exp to raise Corpus to 13. He reasons that Darius wants to
devise his own Longevity Ritual, and have a decent Penetration with PeCo
spells. Next, he goes for a bit more versatility, spending 30 exp to
raise Creo to 10, 60 exp to raise all of Aquam, Ignem, Imaginem, Mentem,
Terram, Vim to 4, and 1 exp each on Rego and Intellego, for scores of 1
in each. That leaves him 30 exp, which he spends on *Winter's Icy Touch*
and a level 20 version of *Rusted Decay of Ten-Score Years* (PeTe 10,
Target increased to Group = +2 Magnitudes). Again, he needs to pick a
mastery ability for the spell.

Niall then decides that Darius will spend the next year in the
laboratory, so he gains no experience points in that year. See the
Laboratory Chapter from page @@ for details of these activities. Season
1: Opens spear haft (staff) for enchantment (8 pawns vis); Season 2:
Attunes spear haft as a talisman; Season 3: Creates Longevity Ritual (7
pawns vis, Lab Total 35, for a +7 bonus against aging); Season 4:
Instill the talisman with the effect \'*The Wound that Weeps*\' (PeCo
15), with 0 penetration and 50 uses per day. Open the talisman to the
attunement "+4 Destroy things at a distance", because a spear is still
basically the shape of a staff.

From this point, Niall advances Darius a year at a time, because aging
results might have an impact on his study and development. In Darius\'s
35th year he spends 15 exp on Hunt 2, 5 exp on Civil and Canon Law 1,
and 10 exp on raising Animal to 4. At this point, Niall decides that
Darius would have risked suffering a Twilight, as he is the sort of
magus who is likely to botch from time to time. Darius has a Warping
Score of 2, with five Warping Points left over, because he is ten years
out of apprenticeship. He makes the roll to control the magic, and
succeeds, so that Darius does not actually go into Twilight at this
point.

Niall then continues aging Darius to the age of 87, but that\'s enough
example.

Personality

Choose a few words to describe your character\'s personality, and attach
a value between --3 and +3 to each. These are your character\'s
Personality Traits (see page @@). If you have a Minor Personality Flaw,
you should represent that by a Personality Trait with a score of +3 or
--3, and a Major Personality Flaw should have a Personality Trait of +6
or --6.

Grogs should have a score (positive or negative) in Loyal, and warriors
should have a score in Brave. Most warriors will have a positive score
in Brave, but not all.

For companions and magi, they are normally nothing more than a guide to
roleplaying, although you can roll them if you really want to, so you
shouldn\'t worry too much about them. A few specific rules do require
rolls on Personality Traits, however.

Example: Darius of Flambeau

Niall picks Brave, Dedicated to Cause, and Efficient as Darius\'s
Personality Traits, and gives him scores of +3 in each. Darius is quite
an extreme individual, but the numbers are unlikely to have much impact
on play.

Reputations

Characters only start with a Reputation if they choose a Virtue or Flaw
that grants one, but all characters can develop them in play. See page
@@ for rules on Reputations.

Example: Darius of Flambeau

Darius does have a Reputation, thanks to his Hermetic Prestige Virtue.
It\'s a reputation with Hermetic magi, and it has a level of 3. Niall
picks \'Dedicated Hoplite\' as the content. (The Hoplites are the
enforcers of the Order of Hermes. It\'s an informal grouping, but its
members are respected.)

Confidence

Grogs do not have Confidence Points. Like Story Flaws, Confidence Points
indicate a central character.

Companions and Magi start with a Confidence Score of 1 and 3 Confidence
Points, unless they have a Virtue or Flaw that indicates otherwise.

Confidence Points can be spent to gain a one-off +3 bonus to any die
roll, and a maximum number of Confidence Points equal to the
character\'s Confidence Score may be spent on a single roll. More
details on Confidence can be found on page @@.

Equipment

Your character may start with any equipment or possessions she might
reasonably have acquired and retained over her career. You need not list
all her possessions.

Example: Darius of Flambeau

Darius starts with the normal Confidence Score of 1 and 3 Confidence
Points. His only noteworthy piece of equipment is his talisman-spear;
Niall can assume that Darius has any mundane material he needs.

With the statistics completed, Niall finishes filling in the details of
Darius\'s appearance and background, preparing him for play in the saga.

**Characteristics:** Int +3, Per +1, Str +2, Sta 0, Pre --3 (2), Com
--1, Dex +1, Qik +2

**Size:** 0

**Age:** 87 (64), Hermetic age 62 yrs past Gauntlet.

**Decrepitude:** 0 (2)

**Warping Score:** 6 (19)

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** The Gift; Hermetic Magus; Puissant Art (Perdo)
(free Virtue); Flawless Magic; Affinity with Perdo, Enduring
Constitution, Fast Caster, Hermetic Prestige, Premonitions, Second
Sight, Strong-Willed; Blatant Gift, Driven (Hunt Enemies of the Order),
Enemies (Renounced Magus and his Lackeys); Disfigured (Facial Burns)

**Personality Traits:** Brave +3, Dedicated to Cause +3, Efficient +3

**Reputations:** Dedicated Hoplite +3 (Hermetic magi)

**Combat:** Fist: Init +2, Atk +5, Def +6, Dam +2

Kick: Init +1, Atk +4, Def +4, Dam +5

Long Spear: Init +5, Atk +9, Def +8, Dam +9

**Soak:** +0

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, 0, --2, --4, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20) (\* accumulated wound penalties reduce by 1 for
Enduring Constitution)

**Abilities:** Artes Liberales 4 (Grammar), Athletics 2 (Running),
Awareness 3 (Alertness), Bargain 2 (Books), Bavaria Lore 2 (Geography),
Brawl 3 (Punching), Chirurgy 2 (Bind Wounds), Civil and Canon Law 1
(Local Customs), Code of Hermes 3 (Wizards' Marches), Concentration 3
(Spells), Dominion Lore 2 (Divine Creatures), Etiquette 2 (Merchants),
Faerie Lore 2 (Faerie Forests), Finesse 4 (Precision), Folk Ken 2
(Peasants), German 5 (Merchant Slang), Great Weapon 4 (Long Spear),
Guile 3 (Fast talk), Hunt 2 (Tracking), Infernal Lore 2 (Demons),
Intrigue 3 (Plotting), Latin 4 (Hermetic), Leadership 3 (Intimidation),
(Local Area) Lore 3 (Personalities), Magic Lore 2 (Creatures), Magic
Theory 5 (Inventing Spells), Order of Hermes Lore 4 (Criminals), Parma
Magica 5 (Corpus), Penetration 6 (Perdo), Philosophiae 2 (Moral
Philosophy), Premonitions 3 (Enemy Magi), Profession - Scribe 2 (Speed),
Second Sight 3 (Invisibility), Stealth 2 (Shadowing), Survival 2
(Forests), Swim 2 (Rough Water)

**Arts: Cr** 10, **In** 6, **Mu** 4, **Pe** 18+3 (15), **Re** 9; **An**
5, **Aq** 6, **Au** 6, **Co** 15, **He** 6, **Ig** 6, **Im** 5, **Me**
6, **Te** 6 (4), **Vi** 8

**Twilight Scars:** The shadows in Darius' hood are unusually deep,
hiding his face; Nearby, non-magical items decay when Darius uses magic
(as the Warped Magic Flaw).

**Equipment:** Long Spear with haft enchanted as a talisman, instilled
with the effect *The Wound that Weeps* (PeCo 15, penetration 0, 50 uses
per day), attuned to a +4 bonus to spells that destroy at a distance,
Longevity Ritual: Lab Total 35, +7 aging bonus

**Encumbrance:** 0 (2)

**Spells Known:**

*Cripple the Howling Wolf* (PeAn 25/+27\*), Mastery 1 (Fast Casting)

*Parching Wind* (PeAq 20/+28\*), Mastery 1 (Penetration)

*Curse of the Desert* (PeAq 25/+29\*), Mastery 2 (Penetration, Magic
Resistance)

*The Chirurgeon's Healing Touch* (CrCo 20/+32), Mastery 1 (Penetration)

*Whispers through the Black Gate* (InCo (Me) 15/+13), Mastery 1 (Quiet
Casting)

*The Inexorable Search* (InCo 20/+22), Mastery 1 (Penetration)

*Gift of the Bear's Fortitude* (MuCo 25/+20), Mastery 1 (Fast Casting)

*Dust to Dust* (PeCo 15/+37\*), Mastery 1 (Penetration)

*The Wound that Weeps* (PeCo 15/+37\*), Mastery 1 (Penetration)

*Incantation of the Milky Eyes* (PeCo 30/+37\*), Mastery 1 (Penetration)

*Twist of the Tongue* (PeCo 30/+37\*), Mastery 1 (Fast Casting)

*Clenching Grasp of the Crushed Heart* (PeCo 40/+38\*), Mastery 2
(Penetration, Magic Resistance)

*Endurance of the Berserkers* (ReCo 15/+25), Mastery 1 (Fast Casting)

*Lifting the Dangling Puppet* (ReCo 15/+25), Mastery 1 (Penetration)

*Seven-League Stride* (ReCo 30/+25), Mastery 1 (Fast Casting)

*The Leap of Homecoming* (ReCo 35/+25), Mastery 1 (Fast Casting)

*The Great Rot* (PeHe 25/+28\*), Mastery 1 (Fast Casting)

*Winter's Icy Touch* (PeIg 10/+28), Mastery 1 (Penetration)

*Soothe the Raging Flames* (PeIg 20/+28), Mastery 1 (Fast Casting)

*Ward Against Heat and Flames* (ReIg 25/+16), Mastery 1 (Fast Casting)

*Veil of Invisibility* (PeIm 20/+28), Mastery 2 (Quiet Casting x 2)

*Tip of the Tongue* (PeMe 5/+29), Mastery 2 (Fast Casting, Magic
Resistance)

*Calm the Motion of the Heart* (PeMe 15/+28), Mastery 1 (Quiet Casting)

*Loss of But a Moment's Memory* (PeMe 15/+30\*), Mastery 3 (Quiet
Casting x 2, Still Casting)

*Blessing of Childlike Bliss* (PeMe 25/+30), Mastery 3 (Quiet Casting x
2, Still Casting)

*Rusted Decay of Ten-Score Years* (PeTe 20\*, Target increased to
Group/+28\*), Mastery 1 (Fast Casting)

*Demon's Eternal Oblivion* (PeVi 30/+30\*), Mastery 1 (Fast Casting)

*Wind of Mundane Silence* (PeVi 30/+30), Mastery 1 (Magic Resistance)

(\* if Darius is holding his Talisman, he has a +4 bonus to cast spells
which "Destroy things at a distance". This should be added to these
spells if he is holding it.)

**Appearance:** Darius is a frightening individual. A bony figure
swathed in a black, all-encompassing robe and carrying a black-hafted
spear, he is reminiscent of medieval perceptions of the physical
embodiment of death. This image is further emphasized if his hood falls
away from his face, for Darius is bald, with a mass of scar tissue for a
face and no eyes.

Darius is content to cultivate his sinister image; he is a hoplite and
an expert with Perdo magic, dedicated to the discovery and execution of
traitors within the Order. However, it was not always thus; Uwe, the boy
who would eventually become Darius, was born into a merchant family
living in Bavaria. He enjoyed a comfortable life in a moderately
prosperous household. However, shortly after Uwe reached puberty strange
things began to happen. His books would fall apart, furniture he sat on
would break, and the family cat died in his arms. His family became
aware that there was something unsettling about the boy and were only
too happy to see him taken away as an apprentice by the mysterious
scholar who visited them soon after.

Thus Uwe became the apprentice of the hoplite Xerxes, who indoctrinated
his filius to become a hunter of evils within the Order of Hermes. A lab
accident early during apprenticeship burned away Uwe's eyes and the
flesh on his head, but Xerxes restored Uwe's sight, although he refused
to do anything about his filius' appearance. Fifteen years later Uwe
became a magus of the Order of Hermes named Darius and joined the ranks
of the hoplites, its guardians. He has continued to maintain contact
with his (aging) pater, but they only see each other on rare occasions
when they can share information; Xerxes is now too frail to take part in
combat.

Darius travelled to the covenant to establish a base from which he could
seek out and destroy its enemies. He pursued this vocation with an
enthusiasm that impressed his colleagues, and when the previous leader
of the covenant recently passed into Final Twilight he accepted the
position of head, seeing in this an opportunity to instill his values
into the new, younger members swelling its ranks. Darius has been too
busy to train an apprentice, but now he feels the need to pass on his
legacy soon, as he suspects that he may have encountered his bane; he
recently fought a powerful Renounced magus and his followers and was
nearly killed, only "escaping" when a magical maelstrom sent him
physically into Twilight. The traitor is still at large; Darius intends
to kill him in the next confrontation and is even prepared to sacrifice
himself to achieve this aim.

Option: Extremely Complex Character Generation

It is possible to generate a character by working out exactly what he
has done in every season he has been alive, and using the rules in the
Laboratory and Long-Term Events chapters to determine the results. This
is how magi and important companions are normally advanced in play, but
it takes a very long time for character generation. It tends to produce
characters who are close to those generated using the detailed rules,
but with a lot more character.

Even if you do generate a character this way, you should still use the
normal guidelines for the first five years of life, and you assign
Virtues, Flaws, and Characteristics in the normal way. However,
age-based limits on Abilities do not apply, and all Virtues and Flaws
have their normal effect on character advancement. You must discuss with
your troupe the resources that the character has available; with
sensible choices, it is usually hard to raise Abilities above the
age-based limits, which is why they exist in Detailed Character
Creation.

Mythic Companions

Mythic Companions are generated in the same way as other Companion
characters, with some important exceptions:

1\. All Mythic Companions take a Free Virtue which specifies their
status. These Virtues are incompatible with each other, and with The
Gift, and are not available to grogs.

2\. You gain a free Minor Virtue, normally specified by the Mythic
Companion Virtue. In addition, you may take up to ten points of Flaws,
and each point of Flaws is worth two points of Virtues. This produces a
maximum of 21 points of Virtues and 10 points of Flaws. Most Mythic
Companion Virtues require you to take some particular Virtues and Flaws;
these count against your maximum of 20 points of Virtues and 10 points
of Flaws.

3\. You should also agree with the troupe on a minimum set of Ability
scores that the character should have by the time character generation
is complete. As for Hermetic magi, this set of Abilities should come to
a total of 90 experience points. Note that this is not an additional 90
points to spend; it is rather a restriction on how about 90 of your
experience points may be spent. (The set will often include Supernatural
Abilities in which the character gets an initial score of 1 from the
Virtue granting it, and you will not need to spend experience points for
the first point of those Abilities.) While most Mythic Companion types
make suggestions for these Abilities, you may create a character with a
different spread of Abilities if you can convince the troupe that it is
a good idea.

The following types of Mythic Companions cover all the supernatural
realms. You should consult the troupe before choosing one of these, as a
Nephilim and Devil Child might not work well together in the same saga.

Characters with Might Scores

Characters with a Might Score are not human, strictly speaking. No being
with a Might Score can have Virtues which affiliate them to another
realm, for they are full members of the supernatural realm which gives
them their Might. This includes The Gift, True Faith, Faerie Blood, and
Blood of the Nephilim; but also Supernatural Virtues which draw on
sources from a different realm than that of their Might. They may not
even take corrupted versions of these Virtues, such as The False Gift.
If a character receives Magic Resistance from more than one source,
these totals do not stack, even if they derive from the same Realm
(Infernal Might and an infernal power, for example); you simply use the
higher total. Characters with a Might Score are immune to all Warping
(see Warping and Non-Humans, page @@). They may, however, spend a point
of their Might Pool to use any Ability or power which normally incurs
Warping. Those with a Might Score are immune to supernatural backlashes
of their realm --- Twilight, Hubris, Vituperation, and so forth --- but
still suffer any other consequences of a failed or botched roll when
using their powers.

Devil Child

Devil Children are the creations of particularly powerful demons, who
create them for a specific task. They are tragic figures; potent with
Hellish powers but doomed to live a short life being manipulated by
their demonic parent. However, their souls do not belong to Hell despite
their ancestry, and they have the free will to choose for good or evil.
Created as weapons in the conflict between Heaven and Hell for the souls
of mankind, Devil Children can be a powerful tool of evil, and a firm
hand is kept on them by their demonic creator. However, they also have
the potential to be a great tool of good if they seek redemption, and
should they come to the attention of Heaven\'s forces, they may well be
targeted for either salvation or destruction. This often results in the
Plagued by an Angel or Supernatural Nuisance Story Flaws.

Note: Devil Children are very powerful and are recommended for
high-powered sagas or sagas with elder magi.

**Required Virtues**: All Devil Children must take the following
Virtues:

Devil Child (Free --- Mythic Companion virtue)

Demonic Blood (Major, Supernatural)

Demonic Might or Demonic Powers (Minor, Supernatural --- free with Devil
Child)

Puissant Guile (Minor, General)

**Required Flaws**: All Devil Children must take the following Flaw, or
a suitable substitute agreed with the troupe:

Tragic Life (Major, Supernatural)

Devil Children may take three more points of Virtues at no cost (to
balance the compulsory Major Flaw with six Virtue points), and may take
an additional seven points of Flaws, each point granting two Virtue
points.

Devil Children do not have any common required Abilities, because their
involvement in their demonic heritage varies from one individual to
another. Their Abilities should reflect the task for which they were
created.

Faerie Doctors

If humans are to dwell in regions haunted by the fae --- such as the
rural areas which provide the food of nations --- then they must learn
to come to an amicable relationship with their good neighbors. In lands
historically connected to Saxon cultures (principally England, Frisia,
and Saxony) a faerie doctor may act as an intermediary between the
humans and the fae, leaving the region blessed indeed. Also called a
*lybman* (who practices *lyb-craeft*, magical healing and surgery), the
faerie doctor is a human who speaks to the faeries on behalf of the
peasants, explaining their concerns and wishes. Likewise, the local
faeries know that the faerie doctor supports their flow of vitality by
reinforcing the tales and lore of their kind within his region of
influence. The faerie doctor takes it upon himself to keep the memory of
the local fae alive through stories, and to ensure that their homes are
not violated. Should a dispute between humans and faeries arise, the
faerie doctor attempts to mediate, ensuring that there are no
misunderstandings on either side; but he must attempt to remain a
neutral party. In addition to his job as mediator and storyteller, the
faerie doctor also administers directly to his human charges through use
of faerie-granted supernatural powers, such as the removal of blights,
banes, and diseases through his Curse-Throwing power. Faerie doctors are
also adept at locating water and lost things through dowsing.

The faerie doctor is trained from birth by a relative, often an uncle,
for the calling tends to run in families. Faerie doctors are almost
exclusively male, although women can be taught the art if no other
relative can be found. The apprentice is taught the lore of the faeries,
and has direct and personal contact with all the Good Folk in the local
region. As the boy enters puberty, he acquires a companion from amongst
the fae, a friend who provides him with unique insights into faerie-kind
and warns him if he is about to make a social *faux pas*. These faeries
usually have a high Cognizance, and this proves useful in explaining the
actions of other fae. Apart from this, the faerie friend can take any
form --- it may be a willowy nymph, a talking animal, a wizened dwarf,
or any number of other types of faerie. Upon acquiring his companion,
the faerie doctor\'s apprenticeship is complete. He either takes over
his mentor\'s practice, goes into partnership with him, or moves to a
new area to strike out on his own.

Faerie doctors often accompany their oath to not take sides in conflicts
between humans and faeries with other oaths that reflect their status as
having a foot in both realms. The most common oaths are to never cut
one\'s hair, to never grow a beard, to wear women\'s clothes, and to
remain celibate. Such oaths represent the distance the faerie doctor
must keep from the rest of humanity to maintain his close connection
with the fae. Unsurprisingly, a faerie doctor may clash with the
priesthood who see his \'clients\' as demons or evil spirits; however,
the faerie doctor is rarely pagan himself. He simply realizes the true
place of the fae in the daily lives of those under his care.

Faerie Doctors as Mythic Companions

Players wishing to play a magus-level faerie doctor should take the
following Virtues and Flaws.

**Required Virtues:** All Faerie Doctors must have the following
Virtues:

Faerie Doctor (Free, Mythic Companion)

Dowsing (Minor, Supernatural --- Free with Faerie Doctor)

Wise One (Minor, Social Status)

Curse-Throwing (Major, Supernatural)

**Required Flaws:** All Faerie Doctors must have the following Flaws, or
suitable substitutes agreed with the troupe:

Faerie Friend (Minor, Story)

Dutybound ---- obey the oaths of a faerie doctor (Minor, Personality)

**Minimum Ability Scores:** Faerie Doctors should begin play with the
following minimum Ability scores:

Curse-Throwing 4

Dowsing 1

Faerie Lore 3

Profession: Storyteller 1

The Student of Faerie Virtue and the Faerie Upbringing Flaw are very
common amongst Faerie Doctors, and a high number are Gender
Non-Conforming. Many of them possess enhanced abilities to resist many
curses and diseases (such as a Greater or Lesser Immunity, or Rapid
Convalescence Virtues). Other useful Virtues include Free Expression,
Purifying Touch, and Second Sight.

A character can be a faerie doctor without being a Mythic Companion, but
they are understandably less powerful. They still take the compulsory
Virtues and Flaws listed above, but must balance Virtues and Flaws in
the normal manner.

Sin-Eating

In some cultures, the supernatural power of Curse-Throwing is called
Sin-Eating. A sin-eater uses this power to take on the sins of the dying
or recently dead, often acquired by eating a ritual meal of bread, salt,
and ale over the body of the sinner. It is believed that the Sin-Eater
not only saves the deceased from Hell, but also prevents their spirit
from wandering the world as a ghost. The magnitude of the unforgiven sin
should be considered to be a Minor, Serious, or Major Affliction as
appropriate. The effect of Sin-Eating on the soul of the practitioner or
the fate of the mortal soul remains unknowable, but Sin-Eating does
prevent the spirit of the deceased from becoming a ghost due to
unrepented sins. A sin-eater can still use his Supernatural Ability in
the standard fashion, and most commonly takes the curse onto himself.
Sin-eaters are often outcast from society, shunned because of the sins
they accumulate through their career. The Church regularly
excommunicates sin-eaters, not only because of the burden of sin which
they carry but also because they encroach on the territory of the clergy
to administer to the dead. A particularly evil sin-eater might transfer
the sins of the dying onto an otherwise innocent child in return for
pecuniary gain.

Sin-Eating stems from a similar tradition to Curse-Throwing, and thus is
most common in cultures descended from Saxon people --- in England,
Flanders, Frisia and Saxony. Analogous traditions exist in other
cultures, such as the Bavarians and the people of the Balkan Peninsula.
An intriguing variant of sin-eating is part of the Jewish atonement
rituals. Jewish practitioners of a version of Curse-Throwing aligned to
the Divine Realm still conduct the rite of the scapegoat. A goat is
loaded with the sins of a community on Yom Kippur, and driven into a
place of desolation. Incorrectly identified as a propitiatory sacrifice
to Satan, the scapegoat (and this is the origin of that phrase) is an
act of obedience to God as detailed in Chapter 16 of Leviticus.

**Story seed**: A Bjornaer magus comes to the characters for help. He
was unwittingly part of the scapegoat rite when observing Jewish
practices in his goat heartbeast, and now seeks a way to unburden
himself from the community\'s sins.

Nephilim

Nephilim are the divine giants and heroes of ancient myth. While older
nephilim rarely venture from their divine regiones, a few younger
nephilim occasionally leave their homes to wander the earth and
experience new things. Most "young" nephilim are about eighty years old,
which is the start of their adulthood.

Note: Nephilim are very powerful and are recommended for high-powered
sagas, or sagas with elder magi. If your troupe is worried about game
balance, ensure that age levels for characters are roughly parallel.

**Required Virtues**: All Nephilim must take the following Virtues:

> Nephilim (Free - Mythic Companion Virtue)
>
> Blood of the Nephilim (Major, Supernatural)
>
> Greater Immunity: Disease (Major, Supernatural)
>
> Great Stamina (Minor, General)
>
> Great Strength (Minor, General)
>
> Improved Characteristics (Minor, General)
>
> Sense Holiness and Unholiness (Minor, Supernatural)
>
> Strong Angelic Heritage (Minor, Supernatural --- free with Nephilim)

Nephilim must take five points of Flaws to pay for these virtues and may
take an additional five points of Flaws, which grants a further ten
points of Virtues.

**Minimum Ability Scores**: Nephilim should begin play with the
following minimum Ability scores:

> Dominion Lore 4
>
> Hebrew 1
>
> Penetration 1
>
> Sense Holiness and Unholiness 3

Spirit Votary

A spirit votary is a devoted worshiper of a magical spirit. In
pre-Christian days, these individuals would be high priests and
priestesses, and form a cult to venerate their spirits; similar powers
could be found among a number of different cultures. Today, a spirit
votary tends to be a solitary figure railing against the overt
superiority of the Dominion of God.

**Required Virtues:** All Spirit Votaries must take the following
Virtues:

Spirit Votary (Free --- Mythic Companion Virtue)

Second Sight (Minor, Supernatural --- free with Spirit Votary)

Spiritual Pact (Major, Supernatural)

Either one more Major Supernatural Virtue *or* three Minor Supernatural
Virtues

**Required Flaws:** All Spirit Votaries must take the following Flaw, or
a suitable substitute agreed by the troupe:

Pagan (Major, Story)

**Minimum Ability Scores:** Spirit Votaries should begin play with the
following minimum Ability scores:

Local Area Lore 1

Magic Lore 4

Penetration 1

Second Sight 3
