Virtues and Flaws

Almost all characters have some particular talents and some particular
problems, represented in the game by Virtues and Flaws.

Virtues and Flaws are either Minor or Major. Virtues cost points, while
Flaws grant points. Major Virtues cost three points, while Major Flaws
grant three points. Minor Virtues and Flaws cost and grant
(respectively) one point. Players start with no points for buying
Virtues and Flaws, and thus must take Flaws if they want Virtues. A
central character may have up to ten points of Flaws, but no more than
five Minor Flaws.

Virtues provide a benefit to the character, pure and simple. Players
rarely try to avoid getting the benefits they have paid for, so the main
problem is making sure that they do not try to get benefits in areas
they shouldn\'t.

Flaws come in two broad types. General, Hermetic, and Supernatural Flaws
hinder the character, while Personality, Social Status, and Story Flaws
enhance stories. The first category do not have to enhance stories, and
the second do not have to hinder the character. If a General, Hermetic,
or Supernatural Flaw will not hinder a character, it is not a Flaw, and
the character should not be allowed to take it. Similarly, if a Story,
Social Status, or Personality Flaw will not enhance stories, a character
should not be allowed to take it. Thus, if you do not want to involve
demons in your saga, no character can take Plagued by Demon as a Flaw.
Conversely, a player who takes a Story Flaw is saying that he wants his
character to be involved in that sort of story, so he should make sure
that that is true.

Note that Flaws are *not* \'things you would not want to have were you
the character\'. They may be things you would very much like to have,
but because they are a hindrance or a story hook, they still count as
Flaws. This means that some characters may be extremely keen to keep
their Flaws. Even more so, a game Flaw need not be a moral flaw, and a
game Virtue need not be a moral virtue. Indeed, most moral virtues work
well as Personality or Story Flaws, because they get the character
involved in stories.

Some Flaws, such as Blind or Mute, could be fixed using Hermetic magic.
A character with easy access to such magic can only take such a Flaw if
there is some reason why it cannot be fixed, such as that it is part of
a character\'s Essential Nature (see page @@). In general, characters
cannot take Flaws which will quickly be removed in play.

Choosing Flaws

Your choice of Flaws, particularly Story and Personality Flaws, is a way
of indicating the stories that you want to tell about your character.
Particular concepts may suggest particular Flaws, or vice versa, but
there is almost always flexibility.

For example, suppose that you came across the story of Saint Marina the
Monk, and were inspired by it. A very brief summary of the story is as
follows.

A monk at a certain monastery was accused by the daughter of an
innkeeper of getting her pregnant. He refused to defend himself by
accusing her of lying, and confessed that he had sinned, and so the
abbot assigned strict penances, which he performed without complaining
for several years, until he died. After his death, the brothers laying
him out discovered that the monk was a woman. Everyone marveled at her
humility and obedience. Miracles were performed at her tomb, and she was
venerated as a saint. (This is a genuine medieval story, and a web
search will provide more detail.)

Which Flaws would you take?

The obvious choices are Dark Secret (Biologically Female) and Gender
Nonconforming, both as Major Flaws. The troupe might say that they
overlap too much and require you to reduce Gender Nonconforming to
Minor. However, these are not the only choices.

You might take Monastic Vows as your Major Story Flaw, Pious as the
Major Personality Flaw, and Gender Nonconforming as a Minor Personality
Flaw (because the character is, and might as well get a point for it).
In this case, the stories focus on the character\'s commitment to the
monastic vocation, rather than the gender nonconformity.

You might also take Curse of Venus as the Major Story Flaw, Pious as the
Major Personality Flaw, and, again, Gender Nonconforming as a Minor
Personality Flaw. In this case, the character became a monk to get away
from all the importunate men. The Flaw is still there, though, so the
problems have not gone away. A serving woman gets a crush on the monk,
and claims to have been made pregnant.

Another option is to take Enemies as the Major Story Flaw, and
Optimistic as the Major Personality Flaw. She became a monk to get away
from a match chosen by her father, whom she does not like at all. The
abbot, and select other monks, are perfectly aware that she is a woman,
and approve of her decision to run away. They aren\'t quite as sure as
she is that everything will work out. In this case, you might not take
Gender Nonconforming at all, because the character just thinks she is in
disguise. The stories in this case are likely to tend towards farce.

There are many other options, and the same is true in general. These
Flaws should serve as inspiration, but you should not feel forced, by a
character concept, to take any particular Flaw --- not even the Flaw
that originally inspired the concept.

Social Status Virtues and Flaws

Social Status Virtues and Flaws represent a character's standing in
society. In Mythic Europe, no-one is completely outside society, and so
every character must have one of these, to represent the way that
society sees them. In general, these Virtues and Flaws are only
available for sagas that take place in the relevant society --- this
chapter contains the Virtues and Flaws for characters from Europe,
northern Africa, and the Middle East, as well as for Jews, who could
live in any of those areas. If your character is from somewhere a long
way from the covenant, you should probably take Outsider or a Social
Status related to the Order of Hermes, although it might be interesting
to note what their status would be "back home". (Foreign Upbringing
might well also be appropriate, although that is not a Social Status.)

A significant number of Social Statuses are only available to men. This
is because the societies of medieval Europe, on which those of Mythic
Europe are closely based, were not gender equal. Because these are
social statuses, the Virtues and Flaws with a male requirement are
available to characters who are perceived by society as male (or as
meeting any other requirement given). For example, a female character
presenting as male may take these statuses, as long as society believes
her to be a man. (You may want to give her Flaws to represent the
complexity of her situation --- see the nearby insert on Choosing
Flaws.)

This only applies to Social Statuses. All other Virtues and Flaws are
available to characters of any race, gender, or background, although
some may be more common in particular groups. For example, Warrior is a
General Virtue, and thus may be taken by female characters, even though
most trained fighters in Mythic Europe are men.

Virtues and Flaws Rules and Guidelines

A Virtue or Flaw may be taken more than once only if the description
explicitly allows it. Most Virtues and Flaws may only be taken once.

All characters must take one Social Status, and may only take more than
one if the descriptions of the Virtues or Flaws explicitly note that
they are compatible.

A character should not have more than one Story Flaw. This is a
guideline, and may be violated with the whole troupe\'s agreement. The
risk is that one character will be central to too many stories.

A character may not have more than one Major Personality Flaw. A
character should normally not have more than two Personality Flaws in
total, as more risks him becoming a caricature.

**Grogs**

You may take up to 3 points of Flaws, and an equal number of points of
Virtues

You must take one Social Status

You should not take Story Flaws

You should not take more than one Personality Flaw

You may not take Major Virtues or Flaws

You may not take Hermetic Virtues and Flaws

You may not take The Gift

**Companions**

You may take up to 10 points of Flaws, and an equal number of points of
Virtues

You may not have more than 5 Minor Flaws

You must take at least one Social Status

You should not take more than one Story Flaw

You should not take more than two Personality Flaws, and may not take
more than one Major Personality Flaw

You may not take Hermetic Virtues and Flaws, unless you have The Gift
(this would be highly unusual)

**Mythic Companions**

You make take up to 10 points of Flaws, and 2 points of Virtues for
every 1 point of Flaws, for a maximum of 20 points of Virtues

You may not have more than 5 Minor Flaws

You must take the Free Virtue defining which type of Mythic Companion
you are

You gain a free Minor Virtue, normally defined by the type of Mythic
Companion

You may be required to take some particular Virtues and Flaws. These
cost, or grant, points as normal

You must take at least one Social Status

You should not take more than one Story Flaw

You should not take more than two Personality Flaws, and may not take
more than one Major Personality Flaw

**Magi**

You may take up to 10 points of Flaws, and an equal number of points of
Virtues

You may not have more than 5 Minor Flaws

You may not have more than one Major Hermetic Virtue

You must take The Gift and the Hermetic Magus Social Status Virtue

You receive one free Minor Virtue from your choice of House, which you
need not balance with a Flaw

You should take at least one Hermetic Flaw

You should not take more than one Story Flaw

You should not take more than two Personality Flaws, and may not take
more than one Major Personality Flaw

Types of Virtue and Flaw

There are several specific types of Virtue and Flaw. These are described
here, and every Virtue and Flaw lists its type.

Virtues

The Gift

**Hermetic, Major**

Diedne Magic

Elemental Magic

Faerie-Raised Magic

Flawless Magic

Flexible Formulaic Magic

Gentle Gift

Leper Magus

Life-Linked Spontaneous Magic

Major Magical Focus

Mercurian Magic

Mythic Blood

Potent Magic

**Supernatural, Major**

Amorphous

Bee King

Blood of the Nephilim

Command Animals

Corpse Magic

Curse-Throwing

Demonic Blood

Embitterment

Entrancement

Focus Power

Greater Benediction

Greater Immunity

Greater Power

Greater Purifying Touch

Hex

Immune to Disease

Induction

Ritual Power

Sense Passions

Shapeshifter

Skinchanger (Dove)

Spiritual Pact

Strong Faerie Blood

Summon Animals

Supernatural Beauty

Whistle Up The Wind

**Social Status, Major**

Archieunuch

Capo

Cathedral School Master

Doctor in (Faculty)

Guild Dean

Landed Noble

Lasiq

Magister in Artibus

Magister in Medicina

Master Bard

Muqta'

Partner

Redcap

Rosh Beth Din

Senior Clergy

Senior Master

Templar Commander

Venditor

**General, Major**

Death Prophecy

Ghostly Warder

Giant Blood

Guardian Angel

License of Absence

Magian Lineage

Magical Warder

Powerful Relic

True Faith

Ways of the (Land)

Wealthy

**Hermetic, Minor**

Adept Laboratory Student

Affinity with Art

Atlantean Magic

Boosted Magic

Cautious Sorcerer

Clan Ilfetu

Cyclic Magic (positive)

Deft Form

Enduring Magic

The Enigma

Exotic Casting

Extractor of (Form) Vis

Faerie Magic

Fast Caster

Free Study

Gorgiastic

Guest of House Criamon

Harnessed Magic

Heartbeast

Hermetic Prestige

Imbued with the Spirit of (Form)

Inoffensive to (Beings)

Inventive Genius

Life Boost

Magical Memory

Mastered Spells

Masterpiece

Method Caster

Minor Magical Focus

Mystical Choreography

Performance Magic

Personal Vis Source

Potent Magic

Puissant Art

Quiet Magic

Secondary Insight

Side Effect

Skilled Parens

Special Circumstances

Spell Improvisation

Study Bonus

Subtle Magic

Tethered Magic

Verditius Magic

Withstand Casting

**Supernatural, Minor**

Amorphous

Animal Ken

Bound to (Role) Role

Broken Vessel

Crafter's Healing

Demonic Might

Demonic Powers

Dowsing

Dust Devil

Enchanting (Ability)

Eye of Hephaestus

Fabric Ripper

Familiarity with the Fae

Feather Messenger

Font of Knowledge

Frightful Presence

Gender Shift

Homing Instinct

Immunity to Cold

Infernal Heirloom

Kassalan Exorcism

(Land) Regio Network

Leather Ripper

Lesser Benediction

Lesser Immunity

Lesser Power

Lesser Purifying Touch

Magic Sensitivity

Magical Blood

Maker of Textured Vessels

Maker of Water Vessels

Master of (Form) Creatures

Muse

Persona

Personal Power

Premonitions

Ripper

Second Sight

See in Darkness

Sense Holiness and Unholiness

Skinchanger

Strong Angelic Heritage

Sufi

Unaging

Unbound Tongue

Variable Power

Voice of the (Land)

Wilderness Sense

Wisdom from Ignorance

**Social Status, Minor**

'Alim

Almogaten

Almogavar

Baccalaureus

Beadle

Brother Chaplain

Brother Knight

Brother Sergeant

Bureaucrat

Clerk

Custos

Emir

Eunuch

Factor

Failed Apprentice

Falconer

Fida'i

Forge-Companion

Gentleman/woman

Guild Apprentice

Guild Master

Ineslemen

Journeyman

Jurist

Knight

Lone Redcap

Mamluk

Marshal

Master of Kennels

Mazdean Priest

Mendicant Friar

Mercenary Captain

Merchant Adventurer

Notary

Perfectus

Priest

Rabbi

Religious

Senior Bard

Shadchan

Simple Student

Sufi

Templar Administrator

Templar Office Holder

Templar Specialist

Town Magistrate

Troubadour/Trobairitz

University Grammar Teacher

Wise One

**General, Minor**

Academic Concentration (Subject)

Affinity with Ability

All According to Plan

Alluring to (Beings)

Apt Student

Aptitude for (Sin)

Arcane Lore

Aristotelian Training

Berserk

Book Learner

Cautious with (Ability)

Clear Thinker

Craft Guild Training

Common Sense

Convoluted Mind

Educated

Educated (Bardic)

Educated (Hebrew)

Educated (Islamic)

Educated (Vernacular)

Enduring Constitution

Enticer of Multitudes

Faerie Blood

Falls Like a Cat

Famous

Ferocity

Finding Hidden Loot

Free Expression

Forgettable Face

Good Teacher

Gossip

Great (Characteristic)

Hermetic Experience

Improved Characteristics

Independent Study

Indescribable Face

Inoffensive to (Beings)

Inspirational

Intuition

Jack-of-All-Trades

Just an Instant

Keen Sense of Smell

Keen Vision

Knows People

Large

Latent Magical Ability

Learn (Ability) from Mistakes

Light Touch

Lightning Reflexes

Linguist

Long-Winded

Luck

Magian Lineage

Magic Items

Magical Mount

Mentored by Demons

Mild Aging

Natural Leader

Rapid Convalescence

Perfect Balance

Perfect Eye for (Commodity)

Physician of Salerno

Piercing Gaze

Prestigious Student

Privileged Upbringing

Protection

Puissant Ability

Rat Up a Drainpipe

Relic

Reserves of Strength

Schooled in Crime

Self-Confident

Sharp Ears

Skilled Smuggler

Social Contacts

Strong-Willed

Student of (Realm)

Tainted Treasure

Templar Prestige

Temporal Influence

Tough

Trained Assassin

Troupe Upbringing

True Love (PC)

Unaffected by The Gift

Venus\' Blessing

Warrior

Well-Traveled

**Mythic Companion, Free**

Devil Child

Faerie Doctor

Nephilim

Spirit Votary

**Social Status, Free**

Apprentice

Bard

Covenfolk

Craftsman

Domestic Animal

Hermetic Magus

Laborer

Male Guild Sponsor

Merchant

Nuntius

Paid Rights

Peasant

Shamash

Sofer

Templar Confrere/Consoeur

Templar Servant

Wanderer

**Supernatural, Free**

Commanding Aura

The Gift

The Gift is a special Virtue, because it has no cost. The character
suffers all the penalties of The Gift, just as magi do (see page @@),
but can be taught Supernatural Abilities without having to take the
corresponding Virtues (see page @@ for rules). Most importantly, the
character can be taught Hermetic Magic, so all magi must have this
Virtue. A character with The Gift, even if he is not a magus, may take
Hermetic Virtues and Flaws which relate to intrinsic ability rather than
background or training.

Characters may take Virtues that grant Supernatural Abilities without
taking The Gift, and such characters do not suffer the penalties imposed
by The Gift. However, such characters may not learn new Supernatural
Abilities in the course of the saga, although they may improve the ones
they already have. It is possible for unGifted characters to Initiate
new Supernatural Abilities through a Mystery Cult, but even this is
harder for them than for the Gifted.

Characters who have The Gift may start play with a single Supernatural
Ability, without having to take any other Virtue, but if they wish to
learn others they must find opportunities to do so in the course of the
saga. They may also take Virtues granting Supernatural Abilities if they
wish to have more Abilities at character creation. Note that it is
harder for a character with Supernatural Abilities to become a Hermetic
magus (see Training Your Apprentice on page @@), so you may not wish to
take any such abilities if you plan for the character to become an
apprentice. The ability to cast Hermetic magic is the single
supernatural ability possessed by Hermetic magi in virtue of The Gift;
again, they may take more Supernatural Ability Virtues if they wish.

Grogs can never have The Gift, as a character with The Gift is too
important to be a grog. As a rule, companions should only have The Gift
if they are intended to become magi, or if they are members of one of
the other magical traditions described in **Ars Magica 5^th^ Edition**
supplements. Troupes should not allow any other Gifted characters unless
they are absolutely sure that they want them.

Hermetic

Only characters with The Gift can take these Virtues and Flaws, and some
are only applicable to Hermetic magi who have already completed their
training.

If a character has enough Supernatural Virtues for Flaws that affect all
of them to be of comparable scope to those affecting a magus's Hermetic
magic, the troupe may allow the character to take appropriate Hermetic
Flaws as Supernatural Flaws. In most cases, Hermetic Virtues are still
not applicable, but the troupe may choose to allow some.

Social Status

These Virtues and Flaws indicate your place in society, something that
is very important in the hierarchical world of Mythic Europe. Some
Social Status Virtues are Free, which means that they do not cost any
points to buy.

Social Statuses by Culture

Because Social Status Virtues and Flaws refer to a character's place in
society, the available options vary depending on the society they live
in. The "societies" given below are not precisely defined, and not, in
most cases, closely tied to geography. Western Christendom is mostly in
western Europe, but includes the Crusader States, while Islamic includes
the southern Iberian peninsula, and the Jews live everywhere.

**All Cultures**

Free Virtues

Apprentice

Covenfolk

Craftsman

Domestic Animal

Hermetic Magus

Laborer

Merchant

Paid Rights

Peasant

Wanderer

Minor Virtues

Custos

Factor

Failed Apprentice

Forge-Companion

Gentleman/woman

Lone Redcap

Mercenary Captain

Merchant Adventurer

Wise One

Major Virtues

Capo

Partner

Redcap

Venditor

Minor Flaws

Branded Criminal

Companion Animal

Outcast

Outlaw Leader

Outsider

Usurer

Major Flaws

Outlaw

Outsider

**Western Christendom**

Free Virtues

Male Guild Sponsor

Nuntius

Templar Confrere/Consoeur

Templar Servant

Minor Virtues

Baccalaureus

Beadle

Brother Chaplain

Brother Knight

Brother Sergeant

Clerk

Falconer

Guild Apprentice

Guild Master

Journeyman

Jurist

Knight

Marshal

Master of Kennels

Mendicant Friar

Notary

Priest

Religious

Simple Student

Templar Administrator

Templar Office Holder

Templar Specialist

Town Magistrate

University Grammar Teacher

Major Virtues

Cathedral School Master

Doctor in (Faculty)

Guild Dean

Landed Noble

Magister in Artibus

Magister in Medicina

Senior Clergy

Senior Master

Templar Commander

Minor Flaws

Failed Journeyman

Failed Master

Failed Monk/Nun

Surgical Empiricus

**Eastern Christendom**

Minor Virtues

Clerk

Eunuch

Falconer

Jurist

Knight

Marshal

Master of Kennels

Notary

Priest

Religious

Major Virtues

Archieunuch

Landed Noble

Senior Clergy

Minor Flaws

Failed Monk/Nun

**Jewish**

Free Virtues

Shamash

Sofer

Minor Virtues

Rabbi

Shadchan

Major Virtue

Rosh Beth Din

Minor Flaw

Gabai

**Islamic**

Minor Virtues

'Alim

Bureaucrat

Emir

Fida'i

Mamluk

Sufi

Major Virtues

Lasiq

Muqta'

**Hibernia**

Free Virtue

Bard

Minor Virtue

Senior Bard

Major Virtue

Master Bard

**Iberia**

Minor Virtues

Almogaten

Almogavar

**North Africa**

Minor Virtue

Ineslemen

**Persia**

Minor Virtue

Mazdean Priest

**Provençal**

Minor Virtues

Perfectus

Troubadour/Trobairitz

Supernatural

Supernatural Virtues and Flaws provide the character with some benefit
that goes beyond the mundane. All Supernatural Virtues and Flaws are
associated with one of the four realms, Magic, Faerie, Infernal, and
Divine. The most common association for player characters is with the
Magic realm, and this should be the choice if the character concept does
not suggest another option. Some Virtues are always associated with
other realms, such as Faerie Blood and Strong Faerie Blood, which are
always associated with Faerie. A Virtue's description notes if it is
limited in this way. The Faerie realm is an appropriate source for most
Supernatural Virtues, and in some cases, with the troupe\'s approval,
Divine or Infernal sources may be appropriate. Note that Divine and
Infernal Supernatural Virtues create more complex roleplaying situations
than those associated with Magic or Faerie, and troupes may wish to
avoid them for that reason.

The realm of a Virtue or Flaw determines how it interacts with
supernatural auras (see page @@), and provides important background
color. In addition, a character with a Supernatural Virtue or Flaw is
immune to Warping caused by living in a high aura associated with the
same realm (see page @@).

Tainted Virtues and Flaws

Tainted Virtues and Flaws are associated with the Infernal realm, and
can be granted through corruption by demons (see *Realms of Power: The
Infernal,* chapter 9). They can also be taken at character generation,
although no more than half a character's Virtues should be tainted, and
similarly for Flaws. (That is, no more than five points of Tainted
Virtues, or ten for a Mythic Companion, and no more than five points of
Tainted Flaws.) Supernatural abilities granted by Tainted Virtues or
Flaws are always Infernal powers.

At the troupe's discretion, non-tainted versions of some of these powers
may also be available, and associated with the Magic or Faerie realm.

Flaws

**Hermetic, Major**

Blatant Gift

Chaotic Magic

The Constant Expression

Deficient Technique

Difficult Longevity Ritual

Environmental Magic Condition

Magic Addiction

Monastic Vows (Hermetic)

Necessary Condition

Painful Magic

Restriction

Rigid Magic

Short-Ranged Magic

Study Requirement

Suppressed Gift

Twilight Prone

Unnatural Magic

Unstructured Caster

Vulnerable Magic

Waster of Vis

Weak Magic Resistance

Weak Spontaneous Magic

**Personality, Major or Minor**

Ambitious

Avaricious

Compassionate

Compulsion

Compulsive Lying

Depraved

Driven

Envious

Gender Nonconforming

Generous

Greedy

Hatred

Higher Purpose

Lecherous

Meddler

Obsessed

Optimistic

Overconfident

Oversensitive

Pagan

Pious

Proud

Rebellious

Reckless

Vow

Weakness

Wrathful

**Story, Major**

Abandoned Apprentice

Beloved Rival

Bigamist

Black Sheep

Curse of Venus

Dark Secret

A Deal with the Devil

Dependent

Diabolic Past

Difficult Underlings

Enemies

Envied Beauty

Evil Destiny

Excommunicate

Favors

Feud

Fury

Indiscreet

Many Marriageable Daughters

Mistaken Identity

Monastic Vows

Oath of Fealty

Plagued by Supernatural Entity

Raised from the Dead

Rector/Proctor

Servant of the (Land)

Supernatural Nuisance

Suppressed Gift

Tainted Offspring

Tormenting Master

Tragic Life

True Love (NPC)

Tzadik Nistar

Unbaptized

Unhappily Married

University Dean

Vendetta

Vengeful Powers

Wanderlust

**Social Status, Major**

Outlaw

Outsider

**Supernatural, Major**

Age Quickly

Blatant Magical Air

Bound to (Realm)

False Power

Greater Malediction

Horrifying Appearance -- Snake Legs

Hunger for (Form) Magic

Lycanthrope

Raised from the Dead

**General, Major**

Blind

Crippled

Deaf

Dwarf

Enfeebled

The Falling Evil

Leprosy

Low Self-Esteem

Magical Air

Mute

No Hands

Poor

Repellent

**Hermetic, Minor**

Bound Casting Tools

Bound Magic

Brutal Artist

Careless Sorcerer

Ceremonial Spontaneous Magic

Clumsy Magic

Consumed Casting Tools

Corrupted Arts

Corrupted Spells

Creative Block

Cyclic Magic (negative)

Deficient Form

Deleterious Circumstances

Difficult Spontaneous Magic

Disjointed Magic

Disorientating Magic

Exciting Experimentation

Fettered Magic

Flawed Parma Magica

Harmless Magic

Hedge Wizard

Incompatible Arts

Inconstant Magic

Infamous Master

Limited Magic Resistance

Loose Magic

Offensive to (Beings)

Poor Formulaic Magic

Primogeniture Lineage

Short-Lived Magic

Slow Caster

Spontaneous Casting Tools

Stockade Parma Magica

Susceptibility to Divine Power

Susceptibility to Faerie Power

Susceptibility to Infernal Power

Unbearable to (Beings)

Unimaginative Learner

Unpredictable Magic

Vulnerable Casting

Vulnerable to Folk Tradition

Warped Magic

Weak Enchanter

Weak Magic

Weak Parens

Weak Scholar

Weird Magic

**Personality, Minor**

Busybody

Carefree

Church Upbringing

Continence

Covenant Upbringing

Delusion

Depressed

Dutybound

Faerie Upbringing

Fear

Fickle Nature

Follower

Foreign Upbringing

Grudge

Humble

Imagined Folk Tradition Vulnerability

Lost Love

Magical Fascination

Noncombatant

Pessimistic

Poor Memory

Reclusive

Secretive

Seeker

Short Attention Span

Simple-Minded

Sheltered Upbringing

Slothful

Soft-Hearted

Temperate

Weak-Willed

**Story, Minor**

Animal Companion

Beloved Rival

Blackmail

Close Family Ties

Demonic Familiar

Employed by Company

Faerie Friend

Heir

Hermetic Patron

Impious Friend

Magical (Being) Companion

Manufactured Ignorance

Mentor

Primogeniture Lineage

Visions

Weak Personality

**Social Status, Minor**

Branded Criminal

Companion Animal

Failed Journeyman

Failed Master

Failed Monk/Nun

Gabai

Outcast

Outlaw Leader

Outsider

Surgical Empiricus

Usurer

**Supernatural, Minor**

Baneful Circumstances

Corrupted Abilities

Curse of Slander

Cursed Guile

Deteriorating Power

Evil Eye

Exiled Atlantean

Flawed Powers

Fluctuating Fortune

Folk Magic

(Form) Monstrosity

Inscribed Shadow

Lesser Malediction

Manifest Sin

Monstrous Blood

Necessary (Realm) Aura for (Ability)

Prohibition

(Realm) Stigmatic

Restricted Power

Slow Power

Stigmatic Catalyst

Susceptibility to Sunlight

Susceptibility to Warping

Unruly Air

Viaticarus

Visions

Warped by Magic

**General, Minor**

Ability Block

Afflicted Tongue

Anchored to the (Land)

Apostate

Arthritis

Careless with (Ability)

Castratus

Clumsy

Craving for Travel

Curse of Slander

Devoted Parent/Child

Dhimmi

Disfigured

Environmental Sensitivity

Failed Student

Feral Scent

Feral Upbringing

Fish Out of Water (Terrain)

Flashbacks

Fragile Constitution

Frail

Gullible

Hallucinations

Hobbled

Hunchback

Incomprehensible

Independent Craftsman

Infamous

Jinxed

Judged Unfairly

Lame

Lingering Injury

Low Tolerance

Master of None

Missing Ear

Missing Eye

Missing Hand

Motion Sickness

Night Terrors

No Sense of Direction

Nocturnal

Obese

Offensive to (Beings)

Palsied Hands

Poor (Characteristic)

Poor Concentration

Poor Eyesight

Poor Hearing

Poor Living Conditions

Poor Student

Primitive Equipment

Raised in the Gutter

Regular

Restricted Learning

Rolling Stone

Savantism

Short of Breath

Sleep Disorder

Slow Reflexes

Small Frame

Social Handicap

Stuck in Your Ways

Tainted with Evil

Unbearable to (Beings)

Uncertain Faith

Uncontrollable Strength

Uninspirational

Unlucky

Unspecialized

Warped Senses

Weak Characteristics

Witch Marks

Personality

A Major Personality Flaw is an aspect of the character's personality
that defines them and drives stories. You should suggest projects that
your character might have to the troupe, so that the storyguide can use
them to create plots if everyone likes the idea. Similarly, the troupe
or storyguide can suggest that this might be a good moment for the
character's Flaw to get the better of them. (Conversely, the storyguide
can certainly say that this would be a really bad moment, and then you
should keep the Flaw under control, to avoid spoiling the game for
everyone.)

For this reason, a Major Personality Flaw should always be something
that makes the character act. Depression and angst are unsuitable as
Major Personality Flaws, as they will make the character sit moping at
home, and keep the player from having fun. On the other hand, these
Flaws need not be things that other characters think badly of. A Pious
character who wants to go on a pilgrimage, or a Compassionate character
who wants to build an orphanage, are just as driven by their Personality
Flaws as a character with Hatred who wants to commit murder, or one with
Avaricious who aims to steal the local lord's treasure.

In any case, a Personality Flaw leads to stories driven by your
character's actions, so choose one that reflect actions you want your
character to take.

A character may not have more than one Major Personality Flaw, as the
Personality Flaw should be what people think of immediately when they
think of the character.

Minor Personality Flaws are aspects of a character's personality that
strongly color much of what he does, but do not really interfere with or
guide his life. The character can always ignore a Minor Personality Flaw
when following it would be inconvenient, and certainly when it would
clearly cause serious problems. Because you should choose a Flaw you
want play, however, it should have a substantial effect at other times.

Most characters should not have more than two Personality Flaws, Major
or Minor, lest they move from entertaining to profoundly irritating.

A Major Personality Flaw drives your character to act and get involved
in stories, while a Minor Flaw merely provides color.

Story

Story Flaws are background features which can drag the character into
stories. Most count as Major Flaws because they give the storyguide a
way to drive your character to get involved in a story, no matter how
inconvenient it might be. Most of the time, however, they are merely
background color. You should not take more than one Story Flaw, Major or
Minor, to avoid having a single character unduly dominate the saga.

When creating your own Story Flaws, bear in mind that they should always
depend on someone or something outside the character, so that the
storyguide can decide when your hook drags you off on an adventure. An
internal Story Flaw is really a Personality Flaw (see earlier).

Minor Story Flaws are much the same as Major Story Flaws, except that
the character gets some solid benefit from the situation as well as
being dragged into stories at inopportune moments.

Note that, when you take a Story Flaw, you are promising the rest of the
troupe that you will play in those stories. Your character may not like
the events that the Story Flaw leads to, but you should choose one that
will lead to stories you want to play.

Personality and Story Flaws

In a typical saga with five players, each of whom has a companion and a
magus, there may be ten Major Personality and ten Story Flaws. This
means that a given Flaw will probably only have a significant effect in
one story in twenty. If you are planning to run multi-session stories,
or a short saga, you may, therefore, want to limit the number of such
Flaws that the players can take, because otherwise they may never come
into play.

General

General Virtues and Flaws cover everything else. Most provide bonuses or
penalties to mundane activities.

Virtues

**Academic Concentration (Subject)**

*Minor, General*

The character has concentrated in one of the seven subjects of Artes
Liberales, in preference to the other six. He may add +3 to his Artes
Liberales score for that subject. However, he must subtract 1 from Artes
Liberales rolls and totals for the subjects he did not concentrate in.
Include the bonus and penalty modifier in every total that Artes
Liberales is used for, including writing books. This Virtue is
incompatible with the Virtue Puissant Artes Liberales. Puissant Artes
Liberales means a character is particularly adept with all seven liberal
arts, while Academic Concentration means the character focused on one
liberal art in preference to the others.

With troupe approval, this Virtue could be extended to Philosophiae. It
is not allowed for any other Ability besides Artes Liberales and
Philosophiae.

**Adept Laboratory Student**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You digest the instruction of others quite easily. You get a +6 bonus to
Lab Totals when working from the lab texts of others, including when
reinventing spells.

**Affinity with Ability**

*Minor, General*

All Advancement Totals for one Ability are increased by half, rounded
up, as are any experience points you put in that Ability at character
creation. You may only take this Virtue once for a given Ability, but
may take it again for different Abilities. If you take this Virtue for
an Ability, you may exceed the normal age-based cap during character
generation (see page @@) by two points for that Ability.

**Affinity with Art**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your Advancement Totals for one Hermetic Art are increased by one half,
rounded up. At character creation, any experience points you put into
that Art are also increased by one half (rounded up), and you may exceed
the normal recommended limits. You may take this Virtue twice, for two
different Arts.

**'Alim**

*Minor, Social Status*

You are a member of the religious elite. You may be a minor official,
such as a *mu'adhdhin* or an *imam,* or you may be a major figure, such
as a mufti (MUF-tee, someone formally entitled to give a legal opinion)
or a qadi (QAW-dee, judge). You may purchase Academic Abilities during
character generation. This Virtue is only available to male characters.

**All According to Plan**

*Minor, General*

Once per session, a player whose character has this Virtue can reroll a
botch die. The character has prepared, in advance, for this exact
failure and has a contingency plan, which the player must describe.

**Alluring to (Beings)**

*Minor, General*

This Virtue is associated with one of three classes of beings: mundane
animals, faeries, or magical beings. These last two include characters
associated with Faerie or the Magic realms, respectively, through
Supernatural Virtues or Flaws, as well as beings with Faerie or Magic
Might.

These beings are strangely drawn to the character, and generally trust
or obey her without thinking. She gets +3 on Communication and Presence
rolls to affect them. Characters who are Offensive to beings of this
sort cannot take this Virtue, including those who have The Gift or
Magical Air, though characters who are Inoffensive to them or have the
Gentle Gift may.

Note that while Alluring to Magical Beings can affect Hermetic magi, the
Parma Magica protects against this effect as part of resisting the
social penalties of The Gift. Might and other forms of general Magic
Resistance do not hinder this effect.

**Almogaten**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character is the leader of a band of Almogavars, chosen by his
fellows for his skill and experience. He commands a dozen men, and he is
responsible for their welfare and prosperity. He has Standard Armaments
and may take Martial Abilities.

Similar to the Mercenary Captain Virtue, you may choose Wealthy or Poor
to represent the fortunes of the almogaten and his soldiers. If he is
Poor, he leads only a half-dozen men and he has hit hard times lately.
Some of his men only have Inexpensive Armaments, but his main concern is
finding the next meal. If he is Wealthy, he leads a company of two dozen
men, and can afford to upgrade their armaments. The band might own
several horses, and perhaps some herd animals.

These characters are from the Iberian Peninsula, and if they are
particularly far from home the troupe may rule that this is not
available as a social status.

**Almogavar**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character is a member of a band of mercenaries and raiders, living a
life of adventure according to a code of honor and discipline. He shares
a bond of solidarity with his fellows, and they can depend on each
other's loyalty. He has Standard Armaments, and may take Martial
Abilities. He may choose to be the Adalil, the second-in-command, at no
additional cost, getting an increase in both authority and
responsibility. He is supported by his unit, and may not take the Poor
Flaw or Wealthy Virtue.

These characters are from the Iberian Peninsula, and if they are
particularly far from home the troupe may rule that this is not
available as a social status.

**Amorphous**

*Major or Minor, Supernatural, Tainted*

The character is able to take on any human form, so long as it does not
identifiably belong to a particular human being. The character develops
this ability because his body has adopted the almost-gaseous property of
demonic flesh, so any apparent changes in size or fitness are cosmetic,
and do not affect the character's statistics. Some amorphous people can
select a single shape at midnight, which is the Major form of the
Virtue. Its Minor form allows the character to change shape only after
having performed a significant act linked to the Obsession of the
sponsoring demon. The character may only change to his birth form by
selecting it once the conditions of transformation have been met, or
involuntarily changing shape when dying or entering holy ground.

**Animal Ken**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You can communicate with animals as if they were human beings. Choosing
this Virtue confers the Ability Animal Ken 1 (page @@).

**Apprentice**

*Free, Social Status*

This Virtue may be taken by a child character who has the Gift and who
has been accepted by an experienced Hermetic magus, with the troupe's
approval. You are a *discipulus* and will receive extensive magical
training, having the potential to become a Hermetic magus in your own
right. However you must obey the dictates and fulfil the errands of your
master and endure his or her rigorous training, and may be treated no
better than a slave.

**Apt Student**

*Minor, General*

You are particularly good at learning from others. When being taught or
trained by someone else, add five to the Source Quality.

**Aptitude for (Sin)**

*Minor, General, Tainted*

This catch-all Virtue is for those minor effects which demons grant to
their victims to allow them to sin more effectively, and so more often.
Each Aptitude for a particular sin adds +3 to all rolls in a very
limited circumstance linked to a demon's Obsession. As examples,
characters may have aptitudes for picking pockets, for committing
adultery skillfully, or for poisoning people.

**Arcane Lore**

*Minor, General*

You may take Arcane Abilities during character generation. Unless you
have The Gift, you cannot learn Parma Magica. You get an additional 50
experience points, which must be spent on Arcane Abilities.

A Gifted character who is not a Hermetic magus and knows Parma Magica
*must* take the Major Story Flaw Enemy: Entire Order of Hermes, as magi
are bound by their Oath to slay the character on sight, unless he
immediately joins the Order. Such a character cannot be played in a
normal saga, as the other player characters have to kill him.

**Archieunuch**

*Major, Social Status*

You have risen to enjoy the status and privilege associated with the
most important and talented eunuchs, the archieunuchs. Although you are
not a ruler in your own right, a ruler likely depends on you to govern
effectively and has thus granted you considerable authority to act in
his stead. Due to this status and importance, you wield significant
influence among the lesser nobility. You might serve either as a
regional administrator, an important courtier, or a general, and there
are numerous servants and possibly other subordinate eunuchs under your
command. You have been granted a residence, either within a castle or
palace, or elsewhere. Due to your education, you may take Academic
Abilities during character creation. This social status is found in the
eastern Roman empire, with its capital at Constantinople, and does not
exist in western Europe or much of the Muslim world. This Virtue is only
available to male characters, who must also be eunuchs.

**Aristotelian Training**

*Minor, General*

The character is trained in the New Aristotle, having received his
instruction from a teacher using recently translated texts of Aristotle
in preference to the normal curriculum. The character gains a +1 bonus
on Artes Liberales rolls for grammar, logic, and rhetoric, as well as a
+1 bonus when calculating Disputatio Totals (see *Art and Academe,* page
103, for details). A magus with this Virtue may add +1 to his Lab Totals
if attempting to synthesize the New Aristotle with Magic Theory (as
described on page 11 of *Art and Academe*). This Virtue is compatible
with Puissant Artes Liberales.

**Atlantean Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

The magus, or an ancestor in his lineage, has studied the magic of
exiled Atlanteans and has developed several useful extensions to
Hermetic magic. The magus has access to a special Range: Water-way, a
special Duration: Storm, and a special Target: Body-of-water, that he
may utilize with Spontaneous magic and in Formulaic or Ritual spells.

**Water-way** *(Range)***:** The magus can target anyone, or anything,
on (or in) the same water-way as him. For example, a river, or canal, or
lake, or sea is a water-way. Tributary streams of a river are the same
water-way as the main river, but are *not* the same water-way as other
tributaries to the main river. In some cases the troupe will need to
decide precisely where one water-way begins, and another ends.

The magus must touch the water-way, when casting the spell, and the
target must be either also touching the water-way or floating on it (in
a boat, for example). A person on the bank of a river cannot be targeted
by this spell. The magus need not be able to see the target, but he must
be able to sense it in some way, unless the spell is an Intellego effect
intended to determine whether something is in the water-way.

For determining the spell level, water-way is the same Range level as
Sight.

**Storm** *(Duration)***:** A spell with this duration must be cast
during a storm and lasts until the end of the storm. Normally, a storm
lasts a number of minutes or hours, but some large storms may last for
days. The form of the spell must be either Aquam or Auram, but the spell
is not necessarily cast on the storm itself. The length of an entirely
natural storm can be quickly estimated by rolling a stress die and
dividing the result by 2 --- this gives the number of hours that the
storm will last. A botch has no consequence, excepting that the storm
will dissipate in a number of minutes. The storyguide should secretly
determine how long the storm will last --- although an InAu spell, or
Wilderness Sense Ability Roll could easily reveal this information.

For determining the spell level, Storm is the same Duration level as
Concentration.

**Body-of-water** *(Target)***:** A spell with this target targets an
entire body-of-water, whether this is a lake, a river, or a sea. Use the
same guidelines as water-way to determine where a body-of-water begins
and ends.

For determining the spell level, Body-of-water is the same level of
Target as Structure (remember to increase the spell magnitude to effect
a very large body-of-water, like a sea or the ocean).

Possible Abuses of Storms

A ReAu spell with Storm duration intended to "keep a storm raging" will
*not* result in a storm that lasts indefinitely. It will keep the storm
raging for whatever its original life-time was. A ReAu spell with a
duration of Sun can be used to keep to a storm raging for a day, of
course, and repeated castings of such a spell will keep the storm
present until the caster gives up.

Similarly, a CrAu spell with Storm duration will *not* create a storm
lasts indefinitely. It merely creates a storm that lasts for the
duration of whatever storm existed prior to the casting of the spell.
That is, if no storm previously existed this spell will have no effect.
A CrAu spell with a duration of Storm cast on an existing storm will,
however, help to prevent the storm from being dissipated by PeAu effects
before it should naturally expire. A CrAu spell with a duration of Sun
can be used to create a storm with a duration of a day, of course.

**Baccalaureus**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character has completed a three-year program at a university to
receive a baccalaureus artium (Bachelor of Arts degree). He is typically
between 16 and 19 years old, and has 90 experience points that he may
spend on Latin and Artes Liberales --- 30 experience points per finished
year of studies. His future decisions are varied once he gains his
degree: he can extend his university career, teaching extraordinary
lectures as he works toward his magister in artibus degree; teach in a
cathedral or secular school; become a private tutor for a noble family;
or find work in ecclesiastical or secular circles. The character has an
Academic Reputation of 1.

This Virtue is compatible with the Hermetic Magus, Mendicant Friar, and
Priest Virtues, and can be taken by a female character, but only if she
is (or was) studying to be a physician at Salerno.

**Bard**

*Free, Social Status*

The character has attended a bardic school and has passed the
examination after four years, earning him to the title of filí at the
rank of *Dos*. This accords him some respect among the native Irish,
amounting to a Local Reputation of 1. He should be no younger than 20.
You should take the Educated (Bardic) Virtue to represent the learning
he has received. This Social Status only applies in Ireland.

**Beadle**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character is an assistant to a university dean. He is a townsman or
student of merit employed by the university to carry the university's
insignia in parades, collect dues and fines, read mandatory
announcements at university congregations, and announce disputationes.
The character may purchase Academic Abilities at character generation.
This Virtue is only available to male characters.

**Bee King**

*Major, Supernatural*

Bee Kingship is the result of descent from particular faeries, and thus
a form of faerie blood. It grants the following advantages:

Bee Kings do not appear to age after reaching maturity, but every Bee
King not killed by circumstances dies of a rapid illness precisely a
century after birth.

Any Bee King may command any group of bees to perform any action of
which they are physically capable, even if it will lead to their deaths.
Usual instructions like attacking people, increasing the population of
the hive, or constructing objects from wax continue to be performed
until the instruction is countermanded (Penetration 50). Simple commands
of a sentence or less long can be given orally.

Bee Kings may communicate complex messages to bees by having a single
bee land on the Bee King's tongue. This bee then acts as the king's
representative to the hive. Bee Kings can understand the speech of
hives, and can read the minds of bees that they are touching.

Bee Kings are never stung by any variety of biting insect. An attacking
bee swarm is treated as an environmental effect, rather than an opposing
mêlée group. The swarm does +10 damage automatically each round. This
damage may be Soaked normally.

Note that, in Mythic Europe, bees have kings, not queens, but a female
character with this Virtue may choose to call herself a Bee Queen.

This is a Supernatural Virtue, and you cannot lose it when being trained
as a magus (see page @@). If your master cannot preserve the ability,
you cannot be trained.

**Berserk**

*Minor, General*

You are capable of entering a blinding rage when in combat or
frustrating situations. You automatically gain the Personality Trait
Angry +2 (or more, at your option). Any time you take a wound or wound
an enemy, roll a stress die and add your Angry score. A roll of 9+ means
you go berserk. The storyguide can also call for a roll when you are
strongly frustrated. You may deliberately try to go berserk. In this
case, you only need a 6+ when you take a wound or wound an enemy, or a
9+ if you have not been wounded or caused a wound. While berserk, you
get +2 to Attack and Soak scores, but suffer a --2 penalty to Defense.
While berserk, you cannot retreat, hesitate to attack, or give quarter.
If you are still berserk when there are no enemies present, you attack
your friends. You may roll once per round to calm down if you desire,
requiring a stress die + Perception -- Angry against an Ease Factor of
6. You may learn Martial Abilities at character creation.

**Blood Of The Nephilim**

*Major, Supernatural*

You have the blood of angels in your veins and descend from the great
heroes of the Antediluvian Age, the Nephilim. Unless you take the Mythic
Companion Virtue, your heritage is somewhat diluted, although still
significant.

Your Size is increased to +1, and this increases by +1 for every century
you are alive.

You may learn Dominion Lore during character creation without needing to
take the Arcane Lore Minor Virtue.

You age incredibly slowly, and may live for hundreds of years. You need
make an aging roll only once every ten years after the age of 150, and
receive a --5 to Aging Rolls. You gain no benefit from Longevity Potions
or any magic or supernatural power that slows or relieves Aging or
Decrepitude. Once you gain your first Decrepitude Point, it becomes
increasingly difficult for you to learn new things: subtract your age ÷
10 from all Advancement Totals, although the Advancement Total for a
season cannot drop below 1.

Due to your great size, you must eat vast amounts of food (equal to what
three normal people would eat in a day), and have the Minor Personality
Flaw Greedy (which counts as one of your normal Flaws). If you go
without food for even a single day you fall into a deep slumber, a kind
of supernatural hibernation. You will starve to death in (2 + your
Divine Might) days unless you are fed your own body weight in food.
(Note that this Virtue does not itself grant Divine Might; see Strong
Angelic Heritage, later.) After awakening, you suffer a number of lost
Long Term Fatigue Levels equal to the number of days you went without
food.

You may not take The Gift or True Faith, Hermetic Virtues or Flaws,
Methods or Powers (see *Realms of Power: The Divine, Revised Edition,*
pages 46--56), Virtues such as Giant, Mythic, or Faerie Blood, Flaws
such as Age Quickly or Lycanthrope, or Virtues or Flaws that affect your
Size. A descendant of the Nephilim without Divine Might could, in
theory, learn supernatural powers (other than Divine Methods and Powers)
from any realm, but that is very rare. Magi and Grogs may not take this
Virtue.

**Book Learner**

*Minor, General*

You have a talent for comprehending the writings of others. When
studying from books, treat them as if they were three Quality levels
higher than they actually are.

**Boosted Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

By spending a pawn of vis when casting Formulaic spells you may "boost"
the Range, Duration, Target, or size of the effect by one magnitude. You
can do this multiple times for the same spell. For example, boosting
Range from Touch to Sight and Target from Individual to Group would cost
you four pawns of vis. You may not reduce any of the parameters of the
spell, nor may you exceed the limits of Formulaic magic. Casting
success, Fatigue loss, and Penetration are all calculated based on the
original level of the spell, but you do add one additional botch die for
each pawn of vis used. This has no effect on Spontaneous or Ritual
spells, though you can still use vis to boost your Penetration as
normal.

**Brother Chaplain**

*Minor, Social Status*

You are a priest of a crusading order, which is like other priests
except that your vow should include obedience and poverty, in addition
to chastity. Outside of your order you are answerable only to the pope.
You may purchase Academic Abilities during character generation. You
wear the distinctive symbol of your order on your surcoat, which is
usually colored green. This Virtue is only available to male characters.

**Brother Knight**

*Minor, Social Status*

You are a knight in a holy crusading order, and it is your duty to be
ready to fight the infidel at any time. You have sworn a lifelong vow of
obedience, poverty, and chastity, and are answerable only to your
superiors and the pope. Unless you are Poor, you may have high-quality
weapons and armor, and two horses. You may take Academic and Martial
Abilities during character generation. You wear the symbol of your order
on your distinctive surcoat, which is usually pure white (Templars,
Hospitallers) or golden (Teutonic knights). This Virtue is only
available to male characters.

**Brother Sergeant**

*Minor, Social Status*

You are a member of a crusading order, but not a knight or a nobleman.
You have sworn a lifelong vow of obedience, poverty, and chastity, but
this may not be enforced as strictly for you as it would be for a
brother knight. You are answerable only to your superiors in the order
and the pope. Unless you are Poor, you may have high-quality weapons and
armor, and two horses. You may also take Martial Abilities during
character generation. You wear the distinctive symbol of your order on
your surcoat, which is usually colored black or gray. This Virtue is
only available to male characters.

**Bureaucrat**

*Minor, Social Status*

You are a member of the civil administration, probably a katib (KEH-tib,
scribe or secretary) or watha'iqi (wa- THEH-i-qee, writer of legal
documents). You may take Academic Abilities during character creation.
This Virtue is only available to male characters.

**Capo**

*Major, Social Status*

The character manages a trading company that has branches in at least
two cities. *City and Guild,* Chapter 7 gives more details of what this
involves. A capo who is also a partner in the business does not select
the Partner Virtue, instead selecting Poor or Wealthy, as appropriate to
his circumstances.

**Cathedral School Master**

*Major, Social Status*

The character teaches at a cathedral school, one of the many that dot
Mythic Europe. He is at least (30 -- Intelligence) years old and must
have scores of 5 in Latin and Artes Liberales, and a Teaching score of
at least 3. He may learn any Academic Ability, and may teach it to his
students. He is typically not a university man, but was instructed at a
cathedral school. He receives 240 additional experience points, which
may be spent on Academic Abilities and Teaching. The character has an
Academic Reputation of 2.

This Virtue is compatible with the Baccalaureus and Priest Virtues.
Characters with higher university degrees should take those Virtues
instead; a magister or doctor gains no additional status from teaching
at a cathedral school. This Virtue is only available to male characters.

**Cautious Sorcerer**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You are very careful with magic, and are less likely to fail
spectacularly if you do fail. You roll three fewer botch dice when
casting spells (whether ritual, formulaic, or spontaneous), and when
working in the laboratory. This Virtue may not reduce the number of
botch dice rolled below one. However, its effects are applied before any
other effects which reduce botch dice, such as Spell Mastery (see page
@@), and they may reduce the number of botch dice to zero.

**Cautious with (Ability)**

*Minor, General*

You are very careful with a specific Ability, and are less likely to
fail spectacularly if you do fail when using it. You roll two fewer
botch dice than normal whenever you are required to roll botch dice for
that Ability. This may mean that you roll no botch dice. This Virtue may
apply to any Ability, even one you cannot learn at character creation.

**Clan Ilfetu**

*Minor, Hermetic*

The character is a member of Clan Ilfetu within House Bjornaer, and has
received extra training in the rituals of the House. You receive 50
extra experience points that may be spent on House Bjornaer Lore, Magic
Lore (with a specialty in the Great Beasts), and Gothic, the dead
language that the House uses for all of its rituals. It is possible that
the magus has also been Initiated into the Esoteric Mystery of
Divination and Augury (see *The Mysteries Revised Edition,* page 58); if
so, that Virtue must be purchased with the normal allowance of ten
points of Virtues and Flaws. Clan Ilfetu teaches the Divination method
of haemagmomancy, which is divination by observing the blood splatters
of wounded animals; this gives the following bonuses to Divination: +5
family, +3 Corpus. See *Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults,* page 12, for
more details on House Bjornaer and the role of Clan Ilfetu.

**Clear Thinker**

*Minor, General*

You think logically and rationally. You get a +3 bonus on all rolls to
resist lies, confusion, befuddlement, and subterfuge --- whether magical
or mundane.

**Clerk**

*Minor, Social Status*

You are a member of the literate class and are either a professional
scribe, accountant, lawyer, student, or functionary. Due to your
training, you may take Academic Abilities during character generation.
If you are male, you may be in minor orders (acolyte, exorcist, lector,
or doorkeeper), in which case you may marry and still benefit from being
a member of the clergy and as such subject to canon rather than secular
law. Male characters may also be sub-deacons or deacons, the lesser two
holy orders, in which case they would normally be expected to be
unmarried. However, if they were already married, and promise complete
sexual abstinence, they may still be ordained to these orders. A man may
not marry after ordination to holy orders. Those in holy orders are also
subject to canon, rather than secular, law. The Wealthy Virtue and Poor
Flaw affect you normally. This Virtue is available to male and female
characters, but female characters may not be in minor or holy orders.

**Command Animals**

*Major, Supernatural, Tainted*

The character has the ability to mentally command mundane examples of a
species of animal usually associated with the demon who tainted him or
her. At any time, the character may command up to 12 human-sized
animals, and may instruct them to do suicidal things. Smaller animals
can be commanded in far greater numbers, so some characters can command
swarms of insects, or hundreds of rats.

**Commanding Aura**

*Free, Supernatural*

This supernatural power is granted to characters by either the pope, or
the Divine directly. It is an inherent benefit of Church office. Most
characters with this Virtue also have the Senior Clergy Social Status
Virtue.

The character has a power equivalent to the Hermetic spell *Aura of
Rightful Authority* (page @@), but with Voice Range; this power has no
cost, and no Penetration. The character also has a Magic Resistance and
a Soak bonus that depend upon his rank in the Church. If the character
carries a relic, this Magic Resistance is *added* to that of the relic.

**Pope:** Magic Resistance 25, Soak bonus +5.

**Cardinal, or legatus a latere:** Magic Resistance 20, Soak Bonus +4.

**Legatus missus:** Magic Resistance 15, Soak Bonus +3.

**Archbishop:** Magic Resistance 10, Soak Bonus +2.

Papal legates are the representatives of the pope. If the legatus missus
--- a lower grade with limited powers --- delays or deviates from his
mission, then his Commanding Aura ceases to work until he completes
penance. The Commanding Aura is also lost when a legatus missus
completes his mission.

Some lay rulers ordained by the pope (mostly kings and emperors) also
have a Commanding Aura. See *Realms of Power: The Divine*, page 42.

**Common Sense**

*Minor, General*

Whenever you are about to do something contrary to what is sensible in
the game setting, common sense (the storyguide) alerts you to the error.
This is an excellent Virtue for a beginning player, as it legitimizes
any help the storyguide may give.

**Convoluted Mind**

*Minor, General, Tainted*

The character has been exposed to the machinations of demons so often
that he has developed a sense of how their minds work. The character
gains a +3 bonus on all Infernal Lore rolls to determine what a demon
will do, and has a feeling, similar to the Common Sense Virtue, that
prevents him from doing stupid things when dealing with demons.

**Corpse Magic**

*Major, Supernatural*

This Virtue gives the character the Supernatural Ability of Corpse
Magic, at a score of 1.

**Covenfolk**

*Free, Social Status*

You are a member of the covenant staff, and may have lived there all
your life. You are supported by the covenant, and so your standard of
living is determined by the covenant's resources rather than your own.
You may not take the Wealthy Major Virtue or the Poor Major Flaw.

**Craft Guild Training**

*Minor, General*

This character has received above-average training during his
apprenticeship, from a craft master or professional guild. Like Warrior
and Educated, this Virtue gives a bonus of 50 experience points. These
must be spent on any Craft or Profession Abilities, Bargain, or
Organization Lore: Guild.

**Crafter's Healing**

*Minor, Supernatural*

Like the smiths of ancient lore, the character can magically heal wounds
by touching them with the tools of his trade. This is a rare and
mysterious power that Hermetic magi cannot understand or duplicate, and
it is common for this Virtue to follow familial bloodlines. Selecting
this Virtue gives the character the Crafter's Healing Ability at a score
of 1.

**Craftsman**

*Free, Social Status*

You live by making and selling goods. You are probably a free resident
of a town, but you may be from a rural area. The Wealthy Major Virtue
and Poor Major Flaw affect you normally.

**Curse-Throwing**

*Major, Supernatural*

Characters with this Virtue are able to cure diseases and remove curses
by transferring them to another person. Choosing this Virtue confers the
Supernatural Ability Curse-Throwing 1.

**Custos**

*Minor, Social Status*

You are an employee of a covenant, but you have high status within the
walls. You may be a grog, or a specialist, or a manager. You may take
one group of restricted Abilities during character generation, either
Martial, Academic, or Arcane Abilities. If you choose Martial or Arcane
Abilities, you may still learn to speak Latin, although you cannot read
or write it. As a covenant employee, your wealth is determined by the
covenant's prosperity, and you may not take the Wealthy Virtue or Poor
Flaw. This Virtue is available to male and female characters.

This Virtue may also apply to employees of other institutions, such as a
noble household or a monastery.

**Cyclic Magic (positive)**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your magic is attuned to some cycle of nature (solar, lunar, or
seasonal, for example) and as such, is more potent at specific times. At
those times, you receive a +3 bonus to all Casting Scores. The bonus
also applies to Lab Totals if the positive part of the cycle covers the
whole season. The cycle of your magic must be regular and approved by
the storyguide. Furthermore, the length of time when the bonus applies
must be equal to the amount of time when it does not.

**Death Prophecy**

*Major, General*

You have been blessed or cursed as to your fate. Someone (a magician, a
faerie, or other supernatural creature) has put a condition on your
death, and until the condition is met, you will not die, though you can
be seriously injured. You heal normally, but cannot die as a result of
wounds or old age. Unfortunately for you, fate or bad planning can bring
about the conditions in unexpected ways. If, for instance, your death
condition is to fear only boars, you should be wary of men bearing boars
on their coats of arms or of inns named after boars, in addition to the
purely mundane creature. This symbolism may not be obvious: a man known
as a pig in his village might also count as a boar.

The storyguide must keep the prophecy in mind and give fair warning of
items related to the prophecy. This is a Major Virtue because the
character knows he can get away with insane risks; sneaking his prophecy
up on him is an unfair way of negating the value of the Virtue. Players
may only take this Virtue with the agreement of the storyguide or
troupe.

**Deft Form**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You are particularly skilled with one Form. You suffer no penalty to the
Casting Total casting spells in that Form when using non-standard
voicings/gestures (see page @@), including using no voice or gestures
because you are in a non-human form. Voice Range spells still have a
Range based on how loudly you are speaking.

**Demonic Blood**

*Major, Supernatural, Tainted*

The character has a demon as a parent, and was conceived for a specific
task by her Infernal mother or father. Because of this, she is an
Infernal being and possesses an Infernal Might (Corpus) score of 5. This
grants her Magic Resistance. Her body also contains one pawn of Corpus
vis, which can only be extracted once she is dead. She is immune to
Warping of any kind, need not eat or drink, and cannot produce a child;
however, she suffers the natural urges associated with these activities,
and may be required to make Personality rolls to overcome her desires.

She has up to 30 levels of Infernal Powers that may be invoked by
spending Might Points. Design the effects using Hermetic spell
guidelines, or the maleficia guidelines (see *Realms of Power: The
Infernal,* Chapter 10: The Maleficia), taking into account the Powers of
the demon parent. The Might cost for each Power is equal to its
magnitude divided by two, rounded down (but always at least one point).
These may be constant effects designed in the usual fashion (Sun
duration, two uses per day, and an Environmental Trigger; see page @@);
her Might Pool is always reduced by the cost of such a Power, and she
cannot turn these Powers off. The Initiative total of each Power is the
character's Quickness.

She may be unaware of her true heritage, in which case she probably has
either the Delusion or Manufactured Ignorance Flaw to explain her
remarkable capabilities. She has the close attention of Hell, and thus
should offset this Virtue with a Story Flaw to reflect that attention,
such as Tragic Life. The character many learn Infernal Lore during
character creation without needing to take the Arcane Lore Minor Virtue.

She is attended at nearly all times by a minor demon, which tends to
remain in spiritual form, watching over her; if necessary, it protects
her on behalf of her creator/parent. This demon is a ruach (page @@),
who can use its Misfortune Power to blight her enemies. If she is
unaware of her demonic heritage, she either considers herself
exceedingly lucky, or believes the attending demon to be a Magical or
Divine spirit. However, this attendant demon means that her demonic
parent can always find her, and is kept appraised of what she is up to.

A Demonic Blooded character's life span is short --- roughly half that
of a pure-blooded human. Her effective age (which applies as if it were
her real age when creating a Longevity Ritual and when making rolls on
the Aging Table) increases two years for every year that passes, and you
must make two aging rolls each year once her effective age reaches 35.
There is no way to halt or slow this other than Longevity Rituals, if
she can convince someone to make one for her. However, she does not show
the effects of aging; any Aging Points acquired do not get applied to
her Characteristics, although they do still count as experience points
towards Decrepitude.

You cannot take the Infernal Blessings Virtue described in *Realms of
Power: The Infernal*; the Demonic Powers Virtue replaces that Virtue for
the demon-blooded. You may not take any Virtue that affiliates her with
a realm other than the Infernal. Also, you cannot take the Unaging
Virtue or the Age Quickly Flaw. She may not have children, and so cannot
have Dependents of this sort.

**Demonic Might**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You may only take this Virtue if your character has the Demonic Blood
Virtue. Her Infernal Might increases by 2 points. Upon her death, her
body contains a number of pawns of Corpus vis equal to her (Infernal
Might / 5), rounding up. You may take this Virtue more than once, though
it can account for no more than half of the character's total Virtues.

**Demonic Powers**

*Minor, Supernatural*

Only a character with the Demonic Blood Virtue may have Demonic Powers.
He gains an extra 20 levels of Infernal Powers in addition to the levels
granted by Demonic Blood. You may also take this Virtue more than once,
though it can account for no more than half of the character's total
Virtues.

**Devil Child**

*Free, Mythic Companion*

This Virtue has no cost, and can only be taken for a Mythic Companion
who has been born with demonic parents. The character gets the Demonic
Might or Demonic Powers (player's choice) Minor Virtue free.

**Diedne Magic**

*Major, Hermetic*

Your magic lineage and traditions are from the druids and the vanquished
former house of Diedne, making you especially skilled with Spontaneous
magic. When you cast a Spontaneous spell without expending Fatigue, you
may choose to divide by five or by two. If you choose to divide by five,
you need not roll a stress die, and cannot botch, just as normal. If you
choose to divide by two, you must roll a stress die, and may botch.

When you expend fatigue on casting a spontaneous spell, the lowest
applicable Art is doubled before the whole total is divided by two. You
still roll a stress die, and may botch.

You must keep your lineage hidden from the Order, giving you a Major
Story Flaw --- Dark Secret is an obvious choice, but you may choose a
different one with troupe approval. This is in addition to your normal
allowance of Flaws, and does not grant you any points with which to buy
Virtues.

**Doctor in (Faculty)**

*Major, Social Status*

The character has graduated from one of the higher faculties of a
university, in medicine, civil or canon law, or theology, having already
received his magister in artibus license, and may instruct fellow
students. The character may teach anywhere, even at a university that he
did not attend. This is the highest educational license in Mythic
Europe. A doctor of medicine is also titled magister in medicina, having
typically been taught in one of the southern universities.

A character starting the game with this Virtue must be at least (27 --
Intelligence) years old. He must have a score of 5 in Latin, Artes
Liberales, and the Ability that correlates to his faculty degree. The
character has spent ten years at a university and receives an additional
300 experience points, which must be spent on Latin and Academic
Abilities. He also begins the game with an Academic Reputation of 3.

Like other working characters, he must spend two seasons a year
practicing his profession, either teaching or working in a secular or
ecclesiastical court. Both the Wealthy Virtue and the Poor Flaw are
allowable, but players must decide what calamity befell such an erudite
scholar if he is Poor, for which he receives a Bad Reputation at a level
of 2.

This Virtue is compatible with the Hermetic Magus, Mendicant Friar, and
Priest Virtues. It is only available to male characters, with the
exception of Doctors in Medicine who graduated from Salerno. That
university does train female physicians.

**Domestic Animal**

*Free, Social Status, animals only*

The character is an animal who is the property of a covenant or
character, and is supplied with food and shelter. He is expected to
serve his master in return for this provender, as a mount, beast of
burden, hunter, or so forth.

Animal Characters

An animal can have personality and add greatly to stories, just as a
human can. Despite their obvious limitations, it can be a great deal of
fun to play one as a grog, probably while running human grogs as well.
More details on animal characters are given in *Grogs,* page 136, but
players should feel free to simply use the statistics for a mundane
animal given in Chapter 13. Supernatural animals are more complex, and
rules for them are given in the *Realms of Power* supplements,
particularly *Realms of Power: Faerie* (page 50) and *Realms of Power:
Magic* (Chapter 5)*.*

**Dowsing**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You have the ability to find things nearby through the use of a dowsing
rod (usually a forked stick) and your own intuitive sense. Choosing this
Virtue confers the Ability Dowsing 1 (page @@).

**Dust Devil**

*Minor, Supernatural*

This variant of the Skinchanger Virtue allows the character to adopt the
shape of a *tamzawit*, or dust devil, a small whirlwind carrying dust.
She becomes a dust devil of Size +1, can assume the form at any time,
and can direct her movement. Rather than a cloak or animal skin, the
focus object of this Virtue is a glass amulet formed from sand taken
from a Magic aura.

**Educated**

*Minor, General*

You have been educated in a grammar school, and may have attended a
university or cathedral school. You may purchase Academic Abilities
during character generation. During character generation you get an
additional 50 experience points, which must be spent on Latin and Artes
Liberales.

**Educated (Bardic)**

*Minor, General*

The character has attended one of the great bardic schools in Hibernia,
either to receive an education (in which case he need not have attempted
the punishing examination) or to commence training as a bard (in which
case you should also take an appropriate bardic Social Status Virtue).
For Senior or Master Bards this Virtue represents additional years of
study. You receive 50 extra experience points to spend on Art of Memory,
Profession: Storyteller, Profession: Poet, any Area Lore, or any
Organization Lore.

**Educated (Islamic)**

*Minor, General*

You have been educated in a mosque or Qur'an school, and may purchase
Academic Abilities during character generation. You get an extra 50
experience points at character creation, which must be spent on some or
all of Arabic, Persian, Greek, Latin, Theology: Islam, Islamic Law, and
Artes Liberales.

**Educated (Hebrew)**

*Minor, General*

Your character has been educated in a beit ha-midrash or yeshivah and
may purchase Academic Abilities at character generation. Your character
gains 50 extra experience points to be spent on some or all of the
following: Hebrew, Aramaic, Theology: Judaism, and Judaic Lore.
Characters from Iberia or the East may also spend some of these points
on Arabic.

**Educated (Vernacular)**

*Minor, General*

This form of secular instruction, given by tutors to the scions of
merchant houses, emphasizes practical skills likely to make the student
suited to a leadership role in the family business. The character may
purchase Academic Abilities during character creation. She also gains 50
additional experience points, which must be spent on Academic Abilities,
Bargain, the Organization Lore of the character's company, Profession
Merchant, or the language of trade in the company's region (usually
Latin, Greek, or Arabic).

**Elemental Magic**

*Major, Hermetic*

You have been trained in the ability to manipulate raw elemental Forms
(Aquam, Auram, Ignem, and Terram), and view them as a connected whole
rather than four separate Arts. Whenever you gain experience from a
source dedicated to one of these Arts, you gain half the Source Quality
(rounded up) in experience points in each of the other three Arts. For
example, if you studied Ignem from a book with a Source Quality of 13,
you would gain 7 experience points in each of Aquam, Auram, and Terram.

During character creation, assign all your experience points in Arts.
Then assign half the experience points assigned to each of the elemental
Forms to each of the other elemental Forms. Do not actually add these
experience points to the Form in question until you have finished
calculating all the bonus experience points. For example, if you assign
10 experience points to each of Aquam, Auram, and Terram, and 21
experience points to Ignem, then you should assign 15 bonus experience
points to Ignem (5 from each of Aquam, Auram, and Terram), and 21 bonus
experience points to each of Aquam, Auram, and Terram (11 from Ignem,
and 5 each from the other two Forms).

In addition, if a spell with one of these Forms as its primary Form has
another element as a requisite, you use the primary Form to calculate
totals, even if the requisite is lower.

**Embitterment**

*Major, Supernatural*

You may make someone hostile to a target of your choice. Choosing this
Virtue confers the Ability Embitterment 1.

**Emir**

*Minor, Social Status*

This is the same as the Knight Virtue, though due to the rather
different upbringing of Muslim emirs, you are likely to be as skilled
with hunting, religious teachings, and culture as you are with martial
pursuits.

**Enchanting (Ability)**

*Minor, Supernatural*

When you set your mind to it, you can magically induce emotions and
beliefs in others with a particular kind of artistic expression: music,
dance, drawing, storytelling, even craft-work. Choosing this Virtue
confers the Ability Enchanting (Ability) 1 (page @@).

**Enduring Constitution**

*Minor, General*

You can withstand pain and fatigue. Decrease the penalties for reduced
Fatigue levels by one point, and reduce your total penalty from wounds
by one point (but not below zero). You also get +3 on rolls to resist
pain.

**Enduring Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

The effects of your spells tend to last longer than usual (though
Concentration, Momentary, and Ring spells remain just that). The
storyguide secretly rolls a simple die; multiply the spell's normal
duration by the number rolled. This is usually, but not always, a good
thing. This Virtue does not affect the duration of Ritual spells.

**The Enigma**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You have been initiated into the Outer Mystery of The Enigma (see page
@@), and thus are a member of House Criamon. You have a score of 1 in
Enigmatic Wisdom. Note that all Criamon magi get this Virtue free at
character creation.

**Enticer of Multitudes**

*Minor, General, Tainted*

The character has a version of the Inspirational Virtue that can only be
used to manipulate people toward evil acts. The character appears
demagogic rather than heroic, and cannot control a group once he has
whipped it into a frenzy. The enticer forces individuals in a group to
make Personality Trait rolls for the particular sin they are attempting
to evoke, with a bonus of +5 or more.

**Entrancement**

*Major, Supernatural*

You have the power to control another's will by staring into their eyes
and giving them a verbal command. Choosing this Virtue confers the
Ability Entrancement 1 (page @@).

**Eunuch**

*Minor, Social Status*

You have been educated and trained to serve the Byzantine nobility as a
courtier, steward, chamberlain, scribe, lawyer, or accountant. You are
likely employed by a court, a lesser noble, or a covenant. It is also
possible for you to pursue a career in the eastern Church, and some
monasteries accept eunuchs. Due to your education, you may take Academic
Abilities during character creation. This Virtue is only available to
male characters, who must be sexually incapable, rather than simply
inactive. This may be due to castration (see the Castratus Flaw), but
need not be.

**Exotic Casting**

*Minor, Hermetic*

The magus uses non-Hermetic methods to cast Hermetic spells. While he
still needs to employ obvious ritual actions, these are not the same
words and gestures taught as part of Magic Theory within the Order, and
other magi who are unfamiliar with the magus's tradition find it very
hard to recognize which spell he is casting. Any attempt to determine
the Form of his magical effect (page @@) is made against an Ease Factor
of 15, without the magnitude of the effect being subtracted from this
Ease Factor as normal. If the character has any Supernatural Abilities,
then he uses the same methods to cast his Hermetic magic as he does to
use his non-Hermetic magic. The magus cannot choose to use the standard
Hermetic methods instead of those of his native tradition, but can
choose to reduce or forgo words and gestures in the usual fashion (page
@@).

**Extractor of (Form) Vis**

*Minor, Hermetic*

The magus can extract (Form) vis from a Magic aura, but only if the
features of the aura exemplify the Form. For example, an aura on the
shores of a lake might exemplify Aquam, an aura at a burial-site
exemplifies Corpus, etc. Extracting vis in this way is a Laboratory
activity; the magus extracts a number of pawns of Vis equal to a tenth
of his Creo Vim (Form) Lab Total (round up). Obviously, he needs to have
a Laboratory in the aura too, and, of course, the magus can chose to
extract Vim vis instead (see page @@). This Virtue may be taken multiple
times (once for each Form).

**Eye of Hephaestus**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character can innately tell the quality of a manufactured item. If
the item is somehow flawed he is instantly aware of that by merely
touching it. He also has a chance to tell if an item is magical. For
supernatural items made by a craftsman, make a Perception + Awareness +
stress die roll against an Ease Factor of 9. If successful, the
character knows the power of the item. For Hermetic enchanted items, or
those made by other sorcerers, make a Perception + Awareness + stress
die roll against an Ease Factor of 12. If successful, the character
knows the item is enchanted, but has no idea how, or what its powers
might be. Botching either roll results in false information. This Virtue
does not offer any information about the actions or commands necessary
to trigger an item's powers.

Hephaestus was a pagan god of craftsmen, primarily metallurgists.
Calling this Virtue the Eye of St Dunstan is more appropriate for
Christian characters.

**Fabric Ripper**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character has the supernatural ability to tear any manufactured
thing made from plant or animal fibers. This allows her to destroy
sails, break the strap holding on individual pieces of armor, snap the
tack of a horse, burst a sack, and tatter a pair of pants with her mind.
She spends a Fatigue level to activate the ability, and may only target
one object per Fatigue level spent. This is a PeAn(He) 25 effect with +0
Penetration, and does not require any words or gestures.

**Factor**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character manages the interests of a trading house in a single city.
This gives the character a strong social position and connections to
many other regions; see *City and Guild* for more details. Many factors
are junior partners in their companies, and they choose the Partner
Virtue, not this one.

**Faerie Blood**

*Minor, Supernatural*

Somewhere in your ancestry there is a faerie, and this relation gives
you an intuitive grasp of the motivations and personalities of those
supernatural folk. Faeries are more comfortable around you than around
other humans, and given time, may even forget the mortal blood in your
veins.

You are resistant to aging, and get --1 to all aging rolls.

Type of Faerie Blood (pick one, or create a similar one):

Blood of the Bee King: The descendants of Bee Kings may give simple
instructions to bees they touch, and may understand the thoughts
dominating hives of bees. They are unable to give bees instructions that
will kill them, except to command warrior bees to attack, since warrior
bees are so willing to die. (Penetration 25)

Dwarf Blood: You are descended from the master craftsmen of the fay, and
get a +1 bonus to any total including a Craft Ability.

Goblin Blood: Your ancestors were the sneaky inhabitants of the shadows
underground, and you get a +1 bonus on all totals involving stealth.

Satyr Blood: The satyrs are notoriously lecherous. You get a +1 bonus to
Communication and Presence totals when dealing with sexually compatible
characters.

Sidhe Blood: You are descended from one of the noble fay who rule the
lands of Summer and sunlight. Because of the striking and unusual
qualities of your nature add +1 to your Presence, but not to more than
+3. Many mortals may consider you fascinating or alluring.

Spinnen Blood: A character who has Spinnen Blood can convert his or her
own body weight of fiber into cloth per day, simply by touching it. Old
cloth, or products made of cloth fibers, can be unwoven using the same
ability, but this counts toward the maximum weight of cloth a character
can alter per day. Some Spinnen, particularly those who have served as
companions to magi, create other useful objects, like tents, ropes, or
sails in lieu of the same weight of cloth. These characters are from a
single family line that originated near Ghent; see *The Lion and the
Lily,* page 97, for details of how most of the family live.

Undine Blood: The undines are the faeries of the water, and you get a +2
bonus to any action taken underwater, which will partially offset any
penalty applied.

Characters with Faerie Blood can learn Faerie Lore at character
generation.

**Faerie Doctor**

*Free, Mythic Companion*

This Virtue makes you a Faerie Doctor and a Mythic Companion (page @@).
You get the Dowsing Virtue for free.

**Faerie Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You have been initiated into the Outer Mystery of Faerie Magic (see page
@@), and thus are a member of House Merinita. You have the Ability
Faerie Magic 1. Note that all Merinita magi gain this Virtue for free at
character generation.

**Faerie-Raised Magic**

*Major, Hermetic*

The character's experience with faeries and the Faerie realm has
conditioned him to invent spells very quickly; to him, Formulaic spells
seem like inherent powers that you can learn through observation and
experimentation. Because of this, he can teach himself spells outside of
the laboratory. You may spend experience points from Exposure,
Adventure, and Practice on spells you could normally invent that mimic
faerie powers or other supernatural effects your character has observed
that season.

To invent a spell in this way, the magus's Technique + Form +
Intelligence + Magic Theory must at least equal (the spell's level --
10), and you must spend a number of experience points equal to (the
spell magnitude + 4). Spells of level 5 or less cost their level in
experience points (but always at least 1). For example, a level 2 spell
costs 2 experience points, and a Level 15 spell costs 7 experience
points. The magus cannot invent Ritual spells in this way.

If the magus already knows a spell that is similar to one he wishes to
invent (see Similar Spells, page @@), any experience points you spend
towards learning that spell are increased by one-half, rounded up. This
means that a level 25 spell would cost 6 experience points instead of 9,
for example.

This Virtue also includes the Virtue Spell Improvisation. That is, you
may add the magnitude of a known Formulaic spell as a bonus to your
character's Casting Total when spontaneously casting a spell that is
similar to it.

If you take this Virtue during character creation, you should normally
take the Faerie Upbringing Flaw. Because the magus's master also had to
teach him about human society, he probably had less time to teach him
Hermetic magic. It is possible that the apprentice invented Formulaic
spells quickly enough on his own to compensate for this, but you might
take the Weak Parens Flaw to suggest this limitation of his
apprenticeship.

**Failed Apprentice**

*Minor, Social Status*

You were once apprenticed to a mage, but something kept you from
completing your studies. Perhaps your Gift was incomplete or some
grievous mishap robbed you of it altogether. You may still work for your
former master or for the covenant in some other capacity. Magi welcome
you and have compassion for you --- those who are given to such
emotions, anyway. You may learn Academic, Arcane, and Martial Abilities
during character creation, and you are familiar with the lives of magi.
You may not have The Gift, but if your Gift was not completely
destroyed, you may have some Supernatural Abilities. The Wealthy Virtue
and Poor Flaw affect you normally.

**Falconer**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character trains hawks and falcons for a noble patron, and is
responsible for the training, breeding, and health of the animals. He
often has a personal servant to assist, and is an important member of
the noble household, treated with great respect. He should possess the
Ability Profession: Falconer, which governs the care of the birds,
treatment of their diseases, and acquisition and breeding of hawks and
falcons. The Ability Animal Handling is used for the training of the
hawks. A specialist in non-falcons, such as the hawks, is called an
austringer.

A falconer receives 50 extra experience points at character generation
to spend on the Abilities Animal Handling, Area Lore, Etiquette, Hunt,
Latin, Profession: Falconer, and Ride. Many falconers are also Educated.

**Falls Like a Cat**

*Minor, General*

The character is not injured by falls of up to three times his height,
or six times his height if he can soften his fall by catching on
windowsills, breaking through awnings, or hitting branches on the way
down. At greater heights the character suffers Impact damage of +1 for
every additional foot, if landing on a hard surface, or for every
additional four feet, if landing on a soft surface.

**Familiarity with the Fae**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You have a natural understanding of faerie ways, perhaps due to spending
time among them. You get a +2 to all rolls involving social interaction
with faeries. You also gain the effects of the Common Sense Virtue, but
only when the situation pertains to faeries. You may purchase Faerie
Lore at character generation, even if normally unable to take Arcane
Abilities.

**Famous**

*Minor, General*

You have a good Reputation of level 4. Choose any reputation you like
(it need not be justified), and one type.

**Fast Caster**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your magic takes less time to perform than that of other magi. You gain
+3 to Initiative to cast spells in combat and +3 to rolls to determine
fast casting speed.

**Feather Messenger**

*Minor, Supernatural*

This Virtue is only available to a character who can take the form of a
bird (which may be her natural form). She can painlessly separate a
feather from her body, and use it to write as a quill, controlling its
movements telepathically while it remains within Sight. The quill
doesn't need ink; it provides it magically. After she finishes writing,
the character can reattach the feather if in bird form. The quality of
the character as a scribe does not differ between human and bird forms.
The character can also pull off feathers in bird form, turn into a
human, and still mentally control the dropped feathers.

This Virtue is particularly associated with a north African magical
tradition called the Daughters of Four Fathers (see *Between Sand &
Sea,* page 107).

**Ferocity**

*Minor, General, animals only*

Like companion and magus characters, this character has Confidence
points. However, these Confidence points may only be used in situations
where its natural animal ferocity is triggered, such as when defending
its den or fighting a natural enemy. Describe a situation which
activates the Confidence for its species, and take 3 Confidence points
and a Confidence Score of 1 to use when those circumstances are met.

**Fida'i**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character is an assassin of the Nizari Isma'ilis. A fida'i is a
devout member of the sect who is prepared to die on its orders, and as
such he should consider taking either the Oath of Fealty or Dutybound
Flaw. When not on a mission, a fida'i wears white, with a red girdle,
cap, or boots. He has been trained in precise placement of daggers and
blades, as well as disguise. Fida'i may take Martial Abilities at
character creation. He can expect to become a lasiq if he proves his
loyalty to the sect.

This Social Status Virtue may be taken by a character who is living far
from the home of the Nizaris, as the assassins are sent on missions, and
may be sent far away. Such a character should have a Story Flaw
representing his mission, and choose the Social Status he is pretending
to have. See *The Cradle and the Crescent,* from page 162, for more
detail on the Nizaris.

**Finding Hidden Loot**

*Minor, General*

A character with this Virtue gains a +9 bonus to Awareness rolls when
searching a confined space for hidden items, provided they can move the
contents of the space about undisturbed.

**Flawless Magic**

*Major, Hermetic*

You automatically master every spell that you learn. All your spells
start with a score of 1 in the corresponding Spell Mastery Ability. You
may choose a different special ability for every spell you have.
Further, all your Advancement Totals for Spell Mastery Abilities are
doubled.

**Flexible Formulaic Magic**

*Major, Hermetic*

You can vary the effects of Formulaic spells to a slight degree, while
still getting the benefits of casting known magic. You may raise or
lower the casting level of the spell by one magnitude to raise or lower
one (only) of Range, Duration, Target category and Target size by one
step, as long as this does not violate any of the normal limits on
Formulaic magic. You may instead change one (only) of those parameters
to another parameter at the same level, without modifying the casting
level, as long as this does not violate any of the normal limits on
Formulaic magic. Casting success, Fatigue loss, and Penetration are all
calculated based on the final modified level of the spell. You cannot
manipulate Ritual magic in this way.

**Focus Power**

*Major, Supernatural*

The character has a supernatural power with a narrow range of effects,
like the ability to cast spontaneous spells that are associated with a
single type of magic. This power is like a magical focus, in that all of
the possible effects have to be related to a specialty that is smaller
than a single Hermetic Form. The examples for Major Magical Focus show
the scope of this power.

This Virtue grants a pool of 25 points. The maximum level of effect and
Penetration both start at zero. It costs 2 points to raise the maximum
level of effect by 1, and 1 point to raise the Penetration by 1. Thus,
25 points can allow a maximum level of 10 with a Penetration of 5, or a
maximum level of 5 with a Penetration of 15, or combinations in between.
The power has an Initiative score equal to the character's Quickness --
the maximum magnitude of the effect. The character may create any effect
within the scope of the power, up to the level of the effect.

It costs one Fatigue level to activate this power for an effect of level
25 or lower, two Fatigue levels to activate it if the effect has a level
of 26 to 50, and three for 51 to 75.

This Virtue may be taken more than once, and the points gained may be
combined.

This Virtue may be associated with any supernatural realm. If you have
access to other books, such as *Realms of Power: The Divine, Realms of
Power: The Infernal, Realms of Power: Faerie,* or *Hedge Magic Revised
Edition*, you may want to base the power on a different system of
supernatural powers, to get something more appropriate to the character.
If you do, remember that the levels of effects may work on different
scales for different systems, and you may want to change the cost of a
level of effect. The power must be associated with the same supernatural
realm as the system on which it is based. (If you have access to other
books, you may want to restrict powers based on Hermetic magic to the
Magic realm.)

**Font of Knowledge**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You have supernatural access to information you have never learned. This
Virtue bestows the Ability Font of Knowledge 1.

**Forge-Companion**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character is an unGifted craftsman attached to a Verditius magus and
working for him in his lab. You receive 50 additional experience points,
which you can use to raise the particular Crafts her master practices.
As a member of his household, she receives protection and support, but
she is not protected by any of the legal codes of the Order of Hermes.

**Forgettable Face**

*Minor, General*

Never will this character be the one noticed or picked out of a crowd.
Moments after speaking with him, very few people can give an adequate
description of him. He often gets away with things because people are
not sure it was actually him. If other characters must make a roll to
identify him, it is at --3. On the downside, this trait is incompatible
with great beauty, charisma, or commanding presence. Virtues like Venus'
Blessing or Inspirational are prohibited, although Curse of Venus could
work.

**Free Expression**

*Minor, General*

You have the imagination and creativity needed to compose a new ballad
or to paint an original picture, and have the potential to be a great
artist. You get a +3 bonus on all rolls to create a new work of art.

**Free Study**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You are better at figuring things out for yourself than you are at
poring over books. Add +3 to the Source Quality when studying from raw
vis.

**Frightful Presence**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You are capable of instilling great dread through your appearance. This
can work in one of two ways: you are either able to contort your face
into a vision of terror (common if Presence is less than zero); or else
radiate an aura of awe and splendor that makes others weak at the knees
(common if Presence is greater than zero).

Everyone witnessing you displaying your Frightful Presence must make an
immediate Brave Personality roll against an Ease Factor of 3. Add your
Presence to the Ease Factor, ignoring any negative sign (for example, a
Presence of +3 or --3 makes the Ease Factor 6). A failure means that
they either attempt to flee your immediate vicinity, or else are cowed
before your glory.

If the targets remain within your presence (because they are awed or
because they are trapped), they can reattempt the Brave roll every two
minutes. Once a person has been affected by the Frightful Presence and
recovered from its effects, he cannot be affected again; although you
will acquire an appropriate Reputation (such as Fearsome or Awesome) at
a score of 2 among those you have affected, which will color your
dealings with them.

This effect has a Penetration Total of 0.

**Gender Shift**

*Minor, Supernatural, Tainted*

Each midnight, the character may choose to change genders. The
character's male and female forms are consistent across transformations,
and usually appear to be blood kin of each other. The character's
Personality Traits may vary slightly between forms. Pregnant characters
may not use this ability.

**Gentle Gift**

*Major, Hermetic*

Unlike other magi, whose Magical nature disturbs normal people and
animals, your Gift is subtle and quiet. You do not suffer the usual
penalties when interacting with people and animals.

**Gentleman/woman**

*Minor, Social Status*

You are a minor member (possibly illegitimate) of a noble family. You do
not stand to inherit from your relatives, but are still treated as one
of their own and may be addressed as "Lord" or "Lady." You probably
reside near the covenant with your relatives. Although you do not want
for anything, you have no vast wealth of your own. You may occasionally
ask your family to buy expensive equipment for you, but you will need a
convincing rationale. You are expected to wait on your relations much of
the time or you will lose the benefits of family (though you will keep
your social standing if you can otherwise maintain your normal
lifestyle). The Wealthy Virtue and Poor Flaw affect you normally.

**Ghostly Warder**

*Major, General*

A ghost watches over you. It might be a grandparent, a childhood friend,
or anyone else who cares for you enough to stay around after death. The
ghost is invisible and silent to all but you and those with Second Sight
(see page @@). It can see and hear what is going on around you and makes
an excellent spy, since it can leave your presence once per day for up
to half an hour. However, death does not leave people in their normal
state of mind, so the ghost probably has some quirks that make it less
than dependable --- it might even encourage you to join it on the other
side. The ghost has 300 experience points in various Abilities that it
can use to advise you, and ghosts may take any Abilities. See page @@
for an example of a ghostly warder. This is a more specific version of
Magical Warder (see later), and is an example of that Virtue.

**The Gift**

*Free, Special*

You have the ability to work magic. See earlier, page @@, for full
details.

**Good Teacher**

*Minor, General*

You can explain new concepts and skills with great facility. Add three
to the Quality of any books that you write, and five to the Source
Quality for anyone who studies with you.

**Giant Blood**

*Major, General*

The blood of the ancient race of giants flows in your veins. Though you
are not as large as your ancestors, you are up to eight feet tall and
can weigh as much as 500 pounds. Your Size is +2, so you take wounds in
7-point increments, rather than the normal 5 (see page @@). You also
gain +1 to both Strength and Stamina. This bonus may raise your scores
in those Characteristics as high as +6. You cannot take this Virtue and
Large (page @@), Small Frame (page @@), or Dwarf (page @@).

**Gorgiastic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

These magi, or their ancestors, have rejected the teachings of House
Criamon and left the House. They magi may have Enigmatic Wisdom and
House Criamon Lore scores after character creation. The character's
Enigmatic Wisdom Score cannot exceed 4 without the assistance of Criamon
magi, or a magical breakthrough. House Criamon attempts to convince
Gorgiastic magi to rejoin. Gorgiastic magi do not usually have Criamon
markings, but develop them if they begin to delve into the causes of
things; for more details, see *Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults,* House
Criamon.

**Gossip**

*Minor, General*

You have regular social contacts in the area that provide you with all
kinds of information about local social and political goings-on. On a
simple roll of 6+, you hear interesting news before almost everyone
else. You treat all local Reputations as twice their actual level. With
some well-placed words, you may be able to bestow new Reputations
(whether deserved or not). You quite likely have a Reputation too --- as
a gossip.

**Great (Characteristic)**

Minor, General

You may raise any Characteristic that already has a score of at least +3
by one point, to no more than +5. Make sure you describe what it is
about you that causes that increase (such as sheer bulk, a lean build,
or extreme charisma). You may take this Virtue twice for the same
Characteristic, and for more than one Characteristic.

**Greater Benediction**

*Major, Supernatural*

You have been blessed by some supernatural power. The effects of the
benediction should be comparable to other Major Virtues. (See insert for
examples.)

Example Greater Benedictions

**Flight**

You are able to fly without the need of wings. Every time you take to
the air, you lose a Long-Term Fatigue Level, and can remain airborne for
a maximum of an hour, traveling up to fifty miles in this hour. Once you
touch the ground, your current flight ends regardless of how much of
your hour has elapsed. You require a prop to fly, such as a carpet or
staff, but any prop of the appropriate type suffices.

**True Sight**

You are rarely fooled by glamour or illusions that change the appearance
of something (although a false image that does not change any particular
thing's appearance, such as from a Creo Imaginem spell, still fools
you). Further, you can always detect the true form of a shapechanged
creature (although not members of House Bjornaer, since both their human
and animal forms are "true" forms). This power has a Penetration of 20.

**Universally Liked**

Everyone who knows you is your friend. You receive a +3 bonus to all
social rolls with people who have known you more than one month. Anyone
who tries to act against you by swaying the emotions or opinions of
others has +3 added to all Ease Factors. This effect has a Penetration
of 0.

**Greater Immunity**

*Major, Supernatural*

You are completely immune to one hazard which is both common and
potentially deadly. For example, you might be immune to fire or to iron
(and only iron) weapons. You may not take immunity to aging --- see the
Unaging Minor Virtue (page @@) instead. This immunity applies to mundane
and magical versions of the thing. If you are immune to fire, you are
also immune to magically created fire.

One important possibility is immunity to deprivation, which means that
you suffer no loss of Fatigue or wounds from going without air, food or
drink. However, you cannot regain long-term Fatigue without rest and
sustenance, and if you are injured deprivation could cause your wounds
to worsen.

You may take this Virtue more than once, with a different immunity each
time.

**Greater Power**

*Major, Supernatural*

The character has a supernatural power that he can activate at will. If
you take the Virtue once, this is a single power, equivalent to a
Formulaic Hermetic spell with a level of 50 or lower. You may also spend
levels one-for-one to give the power Penetration; otherwise, it has a
Penetration of zero.

This Virtue may be taken more than once, and the levels added together
to create several powers. For example, a character who took the Virtue
twice could have a power with a level of 60 and a Penetration of 0, and
a second power with a level and Penetration of 20 each. By default,
there should be one power per Virtue, as this Virtue is intended for
powers that are individually significant. See Lesser Power if you want
your character to have multiple minor powers. However, the troupe may
allow the character to take more powers if they have a strong thematic
link.

The power has an Initiative equal to the character's Quickness ­-- (power
magnitude/2) (rounded down). It costs one Fatigue level to activate if
its level is less than or equal to 50, or two Fatigue levels if its
level is 51 to 100. Higher level effects are unlikely to make sense.

This Virtue may be associated with any supernatural realm. If you have
access to other books, such as *Realms of Power: The Divine, Realms of
Power: The Infernal, Realms of Power: Faerie,* or *Hedge Magic Revised
Edition*, you may want to base the power on a different system of
supernatural powers, to get something more appropriate to the character.
If you do, remember that the levels of effects may work on different
scales for different systems, and you may want to change the number of
levels of effect. The power must be associated with the same
supernatural realm as the system on which it is based. (If you have
access to other books, you may want to restrict powers based on Hermetic
magic to the Magic realm.)

**Greater Purifying Touch**

*Major, Supernatural*

You can, with a touch and the expenditure of a Fatigue level, cure a
single serious disease. This disease should be either life-threatening
or seriously disabling, and should be one from which people do not
normally recover by themselves. You must choose the disease that you can
cure when you take this Virtue, and you can only cure that disease. You
can only choose a disease, not other types of injury or misfortune. See
page @@ for more information on diseases, and *Art and Academe,* page 45
for more detail.

**Guardian Angel**

*Major, General*

You have learned to hear the words of a divine watcher who gives you
practical and spiritual advice. The angel whispers in your ear and tells
you what is best for you spiritually, rather than materially. He
approves of violence only when there is a holy reason --- often
difficult to demonstrate. If you act against the angel's advice, he may
leave you until you correct your ways. The angel has only a limited
awareness of your thoughts, but when you speak aloud, he can hear and
converse with you.

Your guardian angel can also help in two practical ways. First, he can
grant you a +5 bonus to Soak. Second, he can grant you a Magic
Resistance of 15. This Magic Resistance is not compatible with a magus's
Parma Magica, or Magic Resistance from most other sources, but it does
add to the Magic Resistance resulting from Faith Points (see page @@).
The angel only grants you these bonuses if you are acting in accordance
with God's will.

**Guest of House Criamon**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Magi with this Virtue are, politically, members of House Criamon, but
may be created using the rules for any other House. Guests are offered
membership, which Criamon see as a political formality, for many
reasons. The troupe and player should determine why the character found
it necessary to find sanctuary with this House.

**Guild Apprentice**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character is a youth between the ages of 10 and 20 who is learning
his trade from a guild master or journeyman. He has entered into a
contract with his master that guarantees his training. The character is
not able to benefit from either the Poor Flaw or the Wealthy Virtue,
since he is essentially the property of his master, until he moves to
the journeyman rank. Most of his time is spent in ways determined by his
master.

**Guild Dean**

*Major, Social Status*

The character is the ultimate authority of his guild, the man who
decides many of the important decisions that face the guild and
represents it politically. The character is involved in town politics,
long-term trade contacts, and negotiations with other guilds and local
craftsmen. The town's population views him as an important and
prestigious member of their community. You may select Academic Abilities
at character generation.

**Guild Master**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character is a guild master and may legally practice his trade in
town, and hire journeymen to work for him. He participates in guild
activities and is considered a member in good standing. You may select
Academic Abilities at character generation.

**Harnessed Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You have great control over your spells. You are able to cancel any of
your spells simply by concentrating. You can even cancel the magic in
magic items which you created. The act of canceling your magic should be
treated as if you were casting a spell for timing and concentration
purposes. If you are distracted and fail a Concentration roll, another
attempt may be made in a later round. Spells and magic items can be
canceled out over any distance, but once they have been canceled, you
must recast a spell or reinvest a power in a magic item to start the
effect again.

The drawback is that when you die, all of your spells and magic items
sputter out.

**Heartbeast**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You have been initiated into the Outer Mystery of the Heartbeast (see
page @@), and thus are a member of House Bjornaer. You start with the
Ability Heartbeast 1. Note that all Bjornaer magi gain this Virtue for
free at character creation.

**Hermetic Experience**

*Minor, General*

The character has experience with the magi of the Order of Hermes. Maybe
he is currently employed by a covenant, once served in the retinue of a
magus, or has had other dealings or disputes with them. In any case, you
have an additional 50 experience points to spend on Order of Hermes
Lore, Magic Lore, or Latin. You cannot spend other experience points on
Magic Lore or Latin unless the character has another Virtue or Flaw
permitting this. This Virtue may be taken by any grog or covenfolk, or
those who have had an exceptionally close relationship with the Order of
Hermes. It *may* be taken by a magus, but there is usually no point.

**Hermetic Magus**

*Free, Social Status*

You are a member of the Order of Hermes. All magi must take this as
their Social Status, and only magi may take it.

**Hermetic Prestige**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Because of something in your background, other magi look up to you even
if you haven't earned their respect. Some envy you, and most will
certainly expect more from you than from others. You gain a Reputation
of level 4 within the Order.

**Hex**

*Major, Supernatural*

The character has the ability to curse her enemies, making dire
predictions about their future, which tend to come true. This gives her
the Supernatural Ability Hex at 1. This Virtue is most often associated
with the Infernal realm.

**Homing Instinct**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character always knows precisely how to get from where she is to a
number of locations equal to her Intelligence Score (a minimum of 1). To
add a location to the character's repertoire she must be at that
location, the location must be open to the air (so it cannot be inside,
for example), and the player must make an Intelligence + Concentration
Roll against an Ease Factor of 6. If this would increase the number of
known locations beyond the character's limit, then another location must
be "forgotten."

In addition, the character has a fixed Arcane Connection to locations
that she knows, which may be exploited in the usual ways (page @@). This
Arcane Connection is an artifact of the mind, and so may not be given to
another character.

**Imbued with the Spirit of (Form)**

*Minor, Hermetic*

The magus has absorbed some of the powers of an elemental or other magic
object (perhaps by consuming it). This act taints the magus, so that any
being with a Magic Might associated with the Form of this Virtue can
sense his nature when near-by. Typically, weak creatures will be afraid
of the magus and powerful ones will attempt to kill him.

Whenever casting a spell or performing a Laboratory Activity that
requires vis of the chosen Form, the magus may substitute Long-Term
Fatigue Levels for the vis. Each Long-Term Fatigue Level lost reduces
the vis requirement of the spell or effect by 1. When casting a spell
the Fatigue Levels are lost *after* the spell is cast. For Laboratory
Activities the Fatigue loss lasts for the duration of the Laboratory
process (that is, at least a season), and Fatigue Levels substituted for
vis do not count towards the magi's limit of vis expenditure in a
season. The magus takes the Fatigue Penalty to his Lab Total.

Note that studying vis is not a Laboratory activity, so the magus may
not substitute Fatigue Levels for vis when studying.

For example, a magus casting an *Enchantment of the Scrying Pool* ritual
(InAq 30, page @@), requires 6 pawns of some combination of Intellego
and Aquam vis. If the magus is Imbued with the Spirit of Aquam, he may
tire himself (losing three Long Term Fatigue Levels), and reduce the vis
requirement by 3.

**Immune to Disease**

*Major, Supernatural, Tainted*

The character is marked as the property of a very powerful demon, and
the lesser demons that cause most diseases refuse to harm him. Even
characters who turn against their masters retain this protection,
because the mark is indelible, and disease demons are not usually very
bright. A few diseases, for example, those sent as scourges by God,
affect the character normally.

**Immunity to Cold**

*Minor, Supernatural*

Normal cold does not harm you, nor does it make you feel uncomfortable.
You do not need warm environments to remain healthy.

Extreme, magically created cold, such as the effect of *Wizard's Icy
Grip* (page @@), still affects you normally.

**Improved Characteristics**

*Minor, General*

You have an additional three points to spend on buying Characteristics,
but you are still limited to a maximum score of +3 in any single
Characteristic unless you take the Virtue Great Characteristic. You may
take this Virtue multiple times.

**Indescribable Face**

*Minor, General*

After meeting this character, other characters usually find it hard to
describe him sufficiently well to separate him from others. Some
forgettable characters are just average height and weight, with
unremarkable features. Others have a particular feature which is so
striking it crowds out other memories. He has an ostentatious hat. She
was carrying a little dog. The characters can recall the striking
feature, but little else. A player who selects this Virtue for his
character needs to select which form of the Virtue his character has.

A character who is simply average is always forgettable. He can't turn
the ability off and may use props when building a Reputation among other
criminals. He may be "that guy in the black gloves who strangles
people," for example, although no-one recalls precisely what he looks
like. Intimately related characters can eventually become sufficiently
used to the character's forgettable face that they remember it.

A character who distracts with a prop is memorable when she wishes to
be. She can simply not use her devices of distraction if she wishes to
make an impression. She can also switch her distracting prop. For
example if she hears that someone is looking for a lady with a curious
dog, she might switch to a baby, or a curious hat. A character who
distracts with props is usually not recognized by random people in
crowds (whose eyes also follow the prop, not the face), but this
protection is less perfect than a truly forgettable face.

**Independent Study**

*Minor, General*

The character develops new skills extremely quickly on his own. When he
is studying through Practice, add two to the Source Quality, and add
three to the Source Quality of his Adventure experience.

**Induction**

*Major, Supernatural*

The character has the supernatural power to make people experience
things that are not there. She gains the Supernatural Ability Induction
(page @@) with a score of 1.

**Ineslemen**

*Minor, Social Status*

This character is a member of one of the designated religious tribes of
the Tuareg and is therefore accorded some authority over disputes and
immunity from the usual feudal demands of the nobles. He may purchase
Theology: Islam, Islamic Law and (Realm) Lore during character
generation and gains an additional 50 XP to spend on these Abilities.
The character begins with the Minor Flaw Noncombatant, which does not
yield any points for buying Virtues. This Social Status only exists in
North Africa.

**Infernal Heirloom**

*Minor, Supernatural, Tainted*

Infernal heirlooms are magical items that the character inherits from a
diabolist, or, more rarely, finds. The character has the use of the
item, without having to deal with the demon that created it. The item is
extremely useful in some way, but each use draws its owner closer to the
character, as the demon attempts to reclaim its treasure.

Most Infernal heirlooms have only a single effect, and they are usually
triggered by a minor act of, or intention to, sin. As a guideline, each
heirloom may create an effect once per day that is equivalent to a
Hermetic spell of level 25. Items that produce less powerful effects may
be used more frequently at the troupe's discretion.

**Inoffensive to (Beings)**

*Minor, General and Hermetic*

This Virtue is associated with one of five classes of beings: animals,
divine beings, faeries, demons, or magical creatures. These last four
include characters associated with the Divine, Faerie, Infernal, or
Magic realm, respectively, through Supernatural Virtues or Flaws, as
well as beings with Might.

The character's Gift does not bother beings of this sort, although it
still has the normal effects on others. For example, Inoffensive to
Animals makes it easier for her to get along with mundane beasts.
Animals who react positively to The Gift still react positively to her,
since she does have The Gift, but those that do not are not disturbed by
her presence.

You may not take this Virtue more than once; characters who are
Inoffensive to more than one type of being should take Gentle Gift
instead. UnGifted characters may take this Virtue only if they have the
Flaw Magical Air.

Note that Inoffensive to Mundane Humans is not available as a Minor
Virtue; take Gentle Gift instead.

**Inspirational**

*Minor, General*

You are a stirring speaker or a heroic figure, and can urge people to
great efforts. You give targets a +3 bonus to rolls for appropriate
Personality Traits.

**Intuition**

*Minor, General*

You have a natural sensitivity that allows you to make the right
decisions more often than luck can account for. Whenever you are given a
choice in which luck plays a major role (such as deciding which of three
unexplored paths to follow), you have a good chance of choosing
correctly. The storyguide should secretly roll a simple die. On a 6+,
your intuition kicks in and you make whatever might be considered the
"right" decision. Otherwise, you fail to get any flash of insight and
must make the decision without aid.

**Inventive Genius**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Invention comes naturally to you. You get +3 to your Lab Total if you
are not using a Laboratory Text or being taught. If you experiment, you
get +6.

**Jack-of-All-Trades**

*Minor, General*

The character is capable of turning his hand to almost anything. He
suffers no additional botch dice for attempting an Ability roll for an
Ability that he has no score in (see page @@). If it is an asterisked
Ability, then he can attempt a roll as if he had a score of zero with
three extra botch dice, *if and only if* he is normally able to take
Abilities of that type. Characters without this Virtue cannot even
attempt rolls on an asterisked Ability without at least one experience
point in it. For example, he must have a Virtue permitting him to take
Arcane Abilities to attempt an unskilled Magic Lore roll. Some Abilities
are excepted from this Virtue, including those that are not rolled (such
as Parma Magica or Penetration), and all Supernatural Abilities (which
require a specific Virtue for each Ability, rather than the type). The
troupe may make other exceptions on a case-by-case basis, but this
Virtue is supposed to allow the character to attempt things that would
normally require training.

**Journeyman**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character is a trained guild craftsman and may practice his trade in
town under guild supervision. He works for a master for a wage.

**Jurist**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character is a judge, advocate, or procurator --- essentially a
medieval lawyer in some capacity. At character generation he may
purchase the Abilities Latin, Artes Liberales, and Civil and Canon Law.
He is not necessarily university trained, as he may have obtained his
education through private schools, tutors, or a cathedral school, and
need not have a degree. If he is a cleric, he works in an ecclesiastical
setting: the papal curia, the College of Cardinals, or a bishop's or
archbishop's office. If he is a layman, he works for a secular prince or
town municipality.

This Virtue is compatible with the Baccalaureus, Magister in Artibus,
and Doctor in (Faculty) Virtues, as a jurist *may* have a university
education. It is also compatible with the Priest and Mendicant Friar
Virtues. It is only available to male characters.

**Just an Instant**

*Minor, General*

A character with this Virtue, who has had a few seconds to look about a
room, does not need to make Awareness checks to detect or remember
anything of interest on the room's exposed surfaces. Some characters use
this Virtue to discover the layout of a space so they can navigate it in
the dark, while others use it to save time while stealing. Characters
with this Virtue are also useful lab assistants, because they know where
everything is, and are aware of experiments about to critically fail.

**Kassalan Exorcism**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You are capable of performing minor exorcism spells through your
knowledge of the rites of the Mortuary Society of Kassala in Alodia, the
most remote of the three Nubian kingdoms on the southern reaches of the
Nile. You can cast spells in a very limited focus, namely wards against
ghosts and the physical dead (using the Rego Corpus or Rego Mentem
guidelines), and spells to strip Might from these same beings (using the
Perdo Vim guidelines). You cannot create spells that affect other
spirits or creatures who are not the walking dead, but your spells are
equally effective against creatures from any Realm. Wards created with
this Virtue need not be circular, but can instead block the threshold(s)
of a room; this is still treated as a Duration: Ring, Target: Circle
spell for level calculations.

To cast a spell you must expend a Fatigue level, whether the spell
succeeds or fails. You must also spend at least 5 minutes preparing the
spell, during which time you need unbroken concentration and expend one
handful of Kassalan Dust. The spell is designed exactly like a Hermetic
spell; if affecting a ghost you must be able to sense your target. Your
Casting Total is equal to (Stamina + Organization Lore: Mortuary
Society + Aura modifier + stress die) / 2. Penetration is calculated in
the normal fashion: Casting Total -- Spell Level + Penetration
modifiers. Kassalan Exorcism is aligned to the Magic Realm.

Kassalan Dust

Made by the Mortuary Society of Kassala, this dust has powdered gold as
its main component, with myrrh and other spices making up the rest.
Twenty handfuls contain about a Mythic Pound's worth of gold dust.
Kassalan Dust is necessary for Kassalan Exorcism, but grants no bonus. A
handful also adds +3 to uses of the Corpse Magic Supernatural Ability to
command a corpse to return to its grave or prevent it from being
affected by Corpse Magic. Multiple handfuls provide no additional
effect. Kassalan Dust has a Shape & Material bonus of +3 against the
dead. The recipe is known to anyone with Organization Lore: Mortuary
Society.

More details on the Kassalan Mortuary Society can be found in *Lands of
the Nile,* from page 88.

**Keen Vision**

*Minor, General*

You can see farther and more clearly than most. You get a +3 bonus to
all rolls involving sight, not including attacks with missile weapons.

**Keen Sense of Smell**

*Minor, General*

The character's nose is more sensitive than normal for a human. He gets
a +3 bonus to all rolls involving his sense of smell, including
following tracks with the Hunt Ability.

**Knight**

*Minor, Social Status*

You are a knight, a member of the noble classes and one of the elite
warriors of Europe. Unless you are Poor, you may have high quality
weapons and armor, and a horse. Typical armaments for a mid--13^th^
century knight are lance, sword, heater shield, a complete mail suit,
and a warhorse. You may take Martial Abilities during character
generation. The Wealthy Virtue and Poor Flaw affect you normally. This
Virtue is only available to male characters, and is compatible with the
Landed Noble Virtue.

**Knows People**

*Minor, General*

Your social contacts are not important for what they give you directly:
they are important because they allow you to match up the desires of
your various friends. A skilled socialite is a middleman, who is owed
gratitude for bringing opportunities to his friends, not someone who
demands favors based on friendship.

Once per story or session, a character with this Virtue may ask for a
bait for a non-player character. A bait is the beginning of a scene or
short, secondary story, outside the main story being told, which if
completed allows the character to gain aid from the nominated target.
For example, if the player characters are unable to gain the assistance
of a nobleman, a player may demand a bait. In the game, this means the
character uses his social skills to determine the needs of the nobleman,
and to hint that he may know a third person with a solution. If the
troupe then plays out a brief scene in which the nobleman's problem is
sorted out, he becomes more biddable.

Troupes may veto any use of these connections which spoils the tension
and pace of the game.

**Laborer**

*Free, Social Status*

The character is a trained worker who practices a trade that is a
valuable service to his community, but by which no finished good is
produced. Unlike a peasant, who is an agrarian worker who works at a
variety of jobs, a laborer concentrates on one specific endeavor to earn
his livelihood, be it hauling wood, washing clothes, cleaning latrines,
carrying luggage, or serving food.

**(Land) Regio Network**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character has access to an extensive network of regiones, perhaps
located in the depths of many lakes throughout Mythic Europe, or hidden
above the clouds in the sky, or buried in subterranean caves under the
ground. The character is associated with one particular type of regio
network.

Once the character is in such a regio he may travel to any other regio
in the network; travel time is one Diameter regardless of geographic
distance. To determine whether the character knows the location of a
networked regio in a particular locale an Intelligence + (Area) Lore
roll is made against an Ease Factor of 9. The character knows how to
enter these regiones and can, if he chooses, guide other characters into
the regiones --- although other characters must be able to survive in
the environment of the regio.

Access to the network may be ultimately controlled by other characters
or powers.

**Landed Noble**

*Major, Social Status*

You owe fealty and service to a higher noble, and control land, serfs,
and men-at-arms. You have half a dozen servants at your manor house,
including a couple of bodyguards. Your servants should be controlled by
the rest of the troupe. You have sworn an Oath of Fealty, and so it
would be reasonable to balance this Virtue with that Flaw. You get the
normal points for Oath of Fealty if you do. You are wealthier than most
characters, but have no additional free time. You have the power to
enforce the law within your fief, but you may not impose the death
penalty, nor may you mutilate criminals. Floggings and fines are the
normal penalties you impose.

If you are Poor, your fief is either very small, or in a poor area for
farming with few other resources. You must spend every season managing
it, or it may collapse completely, leaving you effectively landless. You
are no wealthier than most average characters, and you have only a
couple of servants.

Wealthy Landed Nobles control more than one fief, and have bailiffs or
stewards for each, so that they do not need to devote any time to
looking after their lands. You are significantly richer than most
Wealthy characters, and could afford to build a small castle or a large
chapel within a cathedral. You have around fifty servants, including a
significant number of warriors.

This Status Virtue is compatible with the Knight Minor Status Virtue,
but unlike that Virtue it is available to male and female characters.

**Large**

*Minor, General*

Your Size is +1 instead of 0, so you are between six and seven feet
tall. This means that the severity of wounds you take increases in six
point intervals rather than five point intervals. (See page @@). You
cannot take this Virtue and Giant Blood (page @@), Small Frame (page
@@), or Dwarf (page @@).

**Lasiq**

*Major, Social Status*

The character is an experienced assassin of the Nizari Isma'ilis, having
successfully completed seven murders at the orders of his grand master,
and commands a small band of up to six fida'is. Lasiq may take Martial
Abilities at character creation. As for a fida'i, a lasiq may be far
from home on a mission, either alone or with some fida'i. In such as
case, he is pretending to have some other social status, which you
should choose. For more details on the Nizaris, see *The Cradle and the
Crescent,* from page 162.

**Latent Magic Ability**

*Minor, General*

You have a magical quality that has not yet manifested itself. You
probably do not realize you have this capacity; if you are a magus, your
master failed to detect it during your apprenticeship. At the
storyguide's discretion, this quality might appear spontaneously or
because of some relevant event (like drinking faerie wine). This is not
The Gift, and the latent ability is more limited than that.

**Learn (Ability) From Mistakes**

*Minor, General*

You are able to improve a particular Ability through the expedient of
repeated failure. The first time in a given game session that you botch
a roll or fail by exactly one point, you gain five experience points in
the Ability. The roll must have come up naturally in the course of the
story. You may take this Virtue several times, once for each Ability
chosen.

**Leather Ripper**

*Minor, Supernatural*

This character has the supernatural ability to destroy a group of
leather objects. This causes metal armor to fall away, as the strips
holding it together disintegrate. It destroys the tack of a horseman,
forcing a Ride roll, with penalties of up to --9 depending on how
dangerous his current maneuvers are. It can destroy the scabbard, belt
and boots of a foe, allowing the ripper to flee or attack. This is a
PeAn(He) 30 effect with +0 Penetration. The character must concentrate
for a moment and spend a Fatigue level to activate the power, but does
not need to speak or gesture.

**Leper Magus**

*Major, Hermetic*

This Virtue describes the mystic legacy passed on from Tytalus to
Hariste's line through the vector of leprosy. This Virtue can only be
bought if the character also has the Leprosy Flaw, and is only available
to magi trained in House Tytalus. It allows him to draw upon the
strength of his body to increase the power of his magic, granting the
Life Boost Minor Virtue. He can also draw even deeper into this power if
he desires, mortifying his disease-ridden flesh to produce vis to power
his own spells. The vis generated in this way can only be used by the
magus himself, in spellcasting or laboratory activities (but not study),
and cannot be stored in any way --- in fact, it never leaves his body.
By accepting a Light Wound, the magus can infuse a single magical
working with three pawns of vis, of any Technique or Form. A Medium
Wound supplies six pawns, a Heavy Wound nine pawns, an Incapacitating
Wound 12 pawns, and a Deadly Wound (killing the magus) 15 pawns. Any vis
that is produced beyond the magus's capacity to use in the current
magical activity is lost, as is any vis surplus to the requirements of
the activity to which this power is applied. Leprotic wounds open on the
magus's body as he calls upon this power, but not quickly enough to
affect the Casting Total of a non-Ritual spell affected by this power.
All Lab Totals suffer the wound penalty as normal, as do the Casting
Totals of spells that take more than one round to cast (such as Ritual
spells). The character makes no Recovery rolls for this wound until the
magical activity that the vis is being used for is complete (i.e., at
the end of the casting of the spell, or the end of a season for lab
work). While this means that the wound cannot get better, it also means
that it does not risk worsening. Since the power is expressed from the
pain of this wound, magic used to negate that pain also negates the
benefits of this Virtue. A wound taken in this fashion must heal
completely before the power may be used again, and any character using
this power more than three times a year must make an extra Aging roll in
winter.

**Lesser Benediction**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You have been blessed by some supernatural power. The effects of the
benediction should be comparable to other Minor Virtues. (See insert for
examples.)

Example Lesser Benedictions

**Gift of the Gab**

You are a very convincing speaker; anyone attempting to detect untruth
in your words receives a --3 penalty to their rolls.

**Green Fingers**

Plants always prosper under your care. Your crops never suffer from
natural diseases or pests so long as you personally tend to them, and
you can therefore get half as much again in terms of yield as others.

**Pricking Thumbs**

If you are in the presence of someone who bears you ill will, you feel a
pricking sensation in your thumbs. You cannot distinguish one enemy from
a crowd with this ability.

**Unusually Fecund**

Every sexual encounter with a partner of the opposite sex results in
conception.

**Lesser Immunity**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You are immune to some hazard which is either rare, or not deadly, or
both. See Greater Immunity, page @@.

**Lesser Power**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character has a supernatural power that he can activate at will.
This is one or more powers, equivalent to Formulaic Hermetic spells with
total levels of 25 or lower. Each power has an Initiative equal to the
character's Quickness ­-- (twice power magnitude). It costs one Fatigue
level to activate if its level is less than or equal to 25, two Fatigue
levels if its level is 26 to 50, and so on. Note that powers with a
level of 26 or higher cost less Fatigue if created using the Greater
Power Virtue. You may also spend levels one-for-one to give the power
Penetration; otherwise, it has a Penetration of zero.

This Virtue may be taken more than once, and the levels added together
to create several powers. For example, a character who took the Virtue
twice could have a power with a level of 30 and a Penetration of 0, and
a second power with a level and Penetration of 10 each.

This Virtue may be associated with any supernatural realm. If you have
access to other books, such as *Realms of Power: The Divine, Realms of
Power: The Infernal, Realms of Power: Faerie,* or *Hedge Magic Revised
Edition*, you may want to base the power on a different system of
supernatural powers, to get something more appropriate to the character.
If you do, remember that the levels of effects may work on different
scales for different systems, and you may want to change the number of
levels of effect. The power must be associated with the same
supernatural realm as the system on which it is based. (If you have
access to other books, you may want to restrict powers based on Hermetic
magic to the Magic realm.)

**Lesser Purifying Touch**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You can, with a touch and the expenditure of a Fatigue level, heal a
specific illness. This illness should be one that people often recover
from on their own, or one that is not particularly serious. You can only
choose an illness, not an injury or other misfortune. See page @@ for
rules on diseases, and *Art and Academe,* page 45 for more detail.

**License of Absence**

*Major, General*

This priest character has a license of absence that relieves him from
some duties. The license might be valid for only a few years or it could
be valid indefinitely. The character has an extra free season each year,
but sometimes it is expected that the extra season is used for study.
This Virtue is compatible with the Wealthy Virtue and Poor Flaw. A
Wealthy priest with a license of absence thus has the whole year free; a
character can never have more than four free seasons in a year. A
license of absence may only be taken by a character with the Priest
Social Status. It may not be taken by Senior Clergy.

**Life Boost**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You may boost your Formulaic or Ritual spell casting totals by expending
additional Fatigue levels. Each Fatigue level gives you an additional
bonus of +5 on the roll, which can yield very impressive Penetration
totals. You may burn more Fatigue levels than you possess. If you do,
you must Soak damage, without the help of armor. The Damage total is 5
for every additional Fatigue level spent, plus a stress die. Thus, if
you spend three additional levels, you must Soak a damage of 15 + stress
die, with your Soak (no armor) + stress die. Fatigue levels spent in
this way are spent regardless of the success or failure of the casting
roll, and any wounds taken are similarly taken even if you fail to cast
the spell. You can kill yourself doing this. The total number of Fatigue
levels to be used must be committed before the casting roll is made.

**Life-Linked Spontaneous Magic**

*Major, Hermetic*

You can do more with spontaneous magic than most magi at the cost of
your own life energy. When you decide to use this ability in casting a
spontaneous spell, you declare the level of effect you wish to produce
before rolling. This level may include a number of levels of Penetration
(see page @@). For example, you can choose to cast a level 10 effect at
level 20, to give a Penetration of 10 plus your Penetration score.

Roll to cast a Fatiguing Spontaneous spell. If your result after
division is higher than the level you declared, you spend only one
Fatigue level as usual. If your result after division is less than the
level you declared, you must expend one additional Fatigue level per
five points (or fraction thereof) by which you missed the target level.
If you run out of Fatigue levels, you take a wound. The number of levels
still needed for the spell is treated as the amount by which a Damage
total exceeds your Soak, and you take the corresponding wound. You can
kill yourself this way.

A maga with this Virtue may still cast Fatiguing Spontaneous spells
normally.

**Light Touch**

*Minor, General*

You have especially good hand-eye coordination and great proficiency for
using your hands in precise, fast ways. You gain +1 to all rolls
involving subtle manipulation of objects (like picking pockets) and roll
one less botch die than you normally would in such activities (minimum
of one). This bonus does not apply to archery, but does apply to playing
musical instruments.

**Lightning Reflexes**

*Minor, General*

You respond to surprises almost instantly. In fact, your reflexes are
sometimes so fast that you don't have a chance to think about how you
are going to respond. Whenever you are surprised or startled, roll a
stress die + Quickness. If you get a 3 or better, you respond
reflexively. You must tell the storyguide on each occasion what one type
of action (attacking, blocking, running, etc.) you would like to respond
with. If attacking in response, you gain +9 to your Initiative Total.
The storyguide is the final arbiter of what happens (though it is always
in the best interests of your immediate self-preservation). You only
react to threats that you are not fully aware of, so you don't get a
bonus against an assassin you watch sneak up on you. Note that you do
not get a choice about whether to react. You could just as easily skewer
a friend sneaking up in fun as you would an assassin about to strike.
Also note that you must perceive an action to react to it --- you can
still be easily killed in your sleep. This Virtue gives you no special
powers of perception.

**Linguist**

*Minor, General*

You are extremely proficient learning new languages. All Advancement
Totals for any Language are increased by a quarter, rounded up, as are
any experience points you put into any language at character generation.
Both Living and Dead languages are augmented with this Virtue.

**Lone Redcap**

*Minor, Social Status*

You are a Redcap who does not maintain ties to a Mercer House, and thus
do not receive magic items or Longevity Rituals. You still begin with
300 experience points for your fifteen years spent as an apprentice, and
receive the benefits of the Well-Traveled virtue, but you are estranged
from the other Redcaps in your area, and have a poor Reputation at level
2 within your House.

You must still devote two seasons each year carrying messages and
performing other services for the Order, for if you do not there is the
possibility you will be declared Orbus and thrown out of your House.
This work pays enough for you to live on if you do not belong to a
covenant, unless you take the Poor flaw and must work a third season as
well. If you take the Wealthy virtue, you can maintain your position
with only a single season of effort each year.

This social status is compatible with any other mundane Social Status
Virtue that would reasonably allow you to do your job as a Redcap, such
as Merchant or Mendicant Friar.

**Long-Winded**

*Minor, General*

You can last longer when exerting yourself than most, and gain +3 on all
your Fatigue rolls. This bonus does not apply to casting spells.

**Luck**

*Minor, General*

You perform well in situations where luck is more of a factor than skill
or talent. You get +1 to +3 (storyguide's discretion) on rolls in such
situations, depending upon how much luck is involved. You do well at
games of chance, but may be labeled a cheater if you play them too
often.

**Lupus (the Wolf)**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character is employed by a university to watch over the students and
ensure that they speak only Latin in their colleges and hostels. He is a
member of the urban community where the university is located. He may
begin play with scores in Latin or Artes Liberales, although a score of
more than 1 in Artes Liberales would be rare. He may live with the
students if he is unmarried, but if he has a family then he lives with
them, possessing keys to the students' housing to allow unannounced
entry. It would be *very* unusual for such a character to be female, but
it is not impossible.

**Magian Lineage**

*Minor or Major, General*

This Virtue makes the character a true blood descendent of the Median
tribe of Magians, the original priestly caste of Persia. Many mobeds,
the priests of Zoroastrianism, possess this Virtue, either Minor or
Major, but it is not a requisite. More details about Mythic
Zoroastrianism can be found in *The Cradle and the Crescent,* Chapter
5*.*

**Minor:** Your character's lineage is weak, although he or she is still
ethnically Magian, and gains a strong constitution due to his purity.
The character gains a --1 bonus to Aging rolls and a +3 bonus to resist
the effects of disease.

**Major:** In addition to the benefits of the Minor Virtue, your
character has an affinity with the ancient prophetic and other mystical
arts of your ancestors. The player must choose three Arcane or
Supernatural Abilities which the character need not start play with, and
which cannot be True Names. These Abilities are considered connected, so
that whenever your character gains experience from a source dedicated to
one of these Abilities, he gains half the Source Quality (round up) in
experience points in each of the other two Abilities. A character must
have access to a Supernatural Ability in one of the normal ways, such as
taking the Virtue at character creation or Initiating it later, in order
to put any experience points into it. If you choose a Supernatural
Ability that your character does not yet have access to, any experience
points generated for it by this Virtue before the character gains access
to the Ability are lost.

**Magic Items**

*Minor, General*

You begin with 25 more starting levels of magic items than you would
otherwise, and the rate at which your items are improved is increased by
one level per year. This is probably because of your exceptional
devotion to the House, or because you have inherited a number of items
from other Redcaps. You must be a Redcap to take this Virtue, and you
may take it more than once, though no single effect in any of your items
can be greater than Level 30.

**Magic Sensitivity**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You are often able to identify a place or object as magical. However,
your sensitivity makes you more susceptible to magical effects: subtract
your Magic Sensitivity score from your Magic Resistance. Choosing this
Virtue confers the Ability Magic Sensitivity 1 (page @@).

**Magical Memory**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your memory has been developed to remember magical rather than mundane
things. You need not keep laboratory texts (see page @@) of your
creations to get the benefit of a Lab Text when reproducing them. If you
have created an effect by following another magus's Lab Text once, you
may get the same benefit in future without needing to have the text
available.

**Magical Blood**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character's essential nature has been improved through exposure to
the Magic realm, often from a magic being, which gives her true form
special supernatural properties. This typically changes the character's
appearance enough that others can recognize that there is something
unusual about her, and people might say that she has magical blood ---
or "faerie blood" (since many people in Mythic Europe do not understand
the differences between the Magic and Faerie realms).

The character may learn Magic Lore during character creation, and is
resistant to aging, receiving a --1 bonus to all of her Aging rolls. In
addition, she receives a minor physical advantage appropriate to one of
the four different types of magic beings (magic animals, magic humans,
magic spirits, and magic things), the one that is associated with the
character's background. Some examples are below, or you can make up your
own.

**Magic Animal:** The character has a physical feature normally
associated with animals, such as wings, scales, gills, teeth, or claws.
These give as much as a +3 bonus to appropriate activities, or may allow
the character to perform actions that a normal character could not
manage (such as fly, or breathe underwater). This feature is very
difficult to hide, making the character obviously different from other
humans.

**Magic Human:** The character may increase one of his Characteristics
by 1, but not above +3. This is often Strength or Stamina (to represent
the blood of giant ancestors), or Presence (to represent the blood of
god-like beings). This often gives the character an otherworldly
appearance. The character also has a positive Reputation at level 3
among others of his bloodline.

**Magic Spirit:** The character gains an appropriate Supernatural
Ability (one associated with a Minor Virtue), such as Magic Sensitivity,
Premonitions, Second Sight, or Wilderness Sense, with an initial score
of 1, though whenever the character uses this Ability, her appearance
becomes obviously supernatural. For example, her eyes might turn black,
she might rise a foot from the ground, or her hair might be blown about
by a wind no one else can feel.

**Magic Thing:** The character has a Lesser or Personal Power associated
with an object or thing. Whenever she activates the effect, her
appearance also changes in a way appropriate to the form of the power.
For example, a power that protects against flames would cause her skin
to become dark with soot and smell like smoke, and a power that lets her
walk on water might cause her to become semi-transparent, like water.

**Magical Mount**

*Minor, General*

The character has a mount, beast-of-burden, or "guard dog," a creature
that has Cunning instead of Intelligence and a Magic Might Score of up
to 25. It has an extra Personality Trait (Loyal 0) and will obey simple
verbal commands. If it has a positive Cunning score, the creature is
also able to perform limited acts on its own initiative. If the
character is incapable of training the creature himself, it must have
been a gift from another character (probably a powerful magus) and the
character must take a Major Story Flaw to represent the consequences:
Favors, to represent his debt to his patron, is the simplest, but
Enemies, if the mount was lured away, is also a possibility. In this
case, only a companion or magus-level character can take this Virtue.

**Magical Warder**

*Major, General*

The character has a magical being that accompanies him, watches over
him, and sees that he comes to no harm. It does not require anything
from the character in return for its service, but note that the more
powerful the warder, the less willing or able it is to help the
character, and the less often it is available to protect him.

A classic example is the ghost of someone close to the character. The
ghost is invisible and silent to anyone but you, unless they have Second
Sight or some other supernatural means of detecting it. It can see and
hear what is going on around you, and leave your presence for up to half
a day, so it makes a good spy. See page @@ for example statistics for
such a Magical Warder.

Design this being as a magic character, using the guidelines in Chapter
13, or in *Realms of Power: Magic* --- a ghostly warder is a good
example of a companion character; it is less powerful and basically an
extension of the character's will, while a more powerful Warder's
assistance is rarer and even more circumstantial.

**Magister in Artibus**

*Major, Social Status*

You have incepted Master of Arts in one of the universities of Europe
(Paris, Bologna, Oxford, Cambridge, Montpellier, Arezzo or Salamanca)
and completed your two years' regency of compulsory teaching. You are
entitled to be addressed as Magister, are subject only to canon law, and
may teach anywhere in Europe.

You are at least (25 -- Int) years old, and must have scores of at least
5 in Latin and Artes Liberales. You have, however, spent eight years in
a university, and gain an additional 30 experience points in each of
those years, for a total of 240 additional experience points over and
above your allowance based on age. You may buy Academic Abilities during
character generation, and must spend your additional experience points
on Academic Abilities or Teaching. You have an Academic Reputation of 2.

You must spend two seasons teaching to maintain yourself and your
reputation as a dependable instructor. These two seasons are spread
between September and June, so you are genuinely free in the summer. If
you take the Poor Flaw, you are still genuinely free in the summer. If
you take the Wealthy Virtue, you can maintain your reputation with a
single season's teaching.

This Virtue is only available to male characters, and is compatible with
the Hermetic Magus, Mendicant Friar, and Priest Virtues.

**Magister in Medicina**

*Major, Social Status*

The character has achieved a doctorate in medicine from one of the
medical schools of Europe (Salerno, Cremona, Montpellier, or Bologna),
and completed his two years' compulsory teaching. This Virtue offers the
same benefits as Doctor in (Faculty). This Virtue is compatible with the
Hermetic Magus, and Priest Virtues. Note that this Virtue *is* available
to female characters, although they must have graduated from Salerno;
male characters may have graduated from any of the medical schools.

**Major Magical Focus**

*Major, Hermetic*

Your magic is much more potent in a fairly limited area, such as
weather, necromancy, birds, or emotions. This area should be smaller
than a single Art, but may be spread over several Arts -- necromancy,
for example, covers both Corpus and Mentem effects. You cannot be
focused on laboratory activities, although a focus does apply to
laboratory activities.

Sample Major Magical Foci

This list is merely exemplary. Other foci are possible.

Animal: Birds, or mammals, or domesticated animals.

Aquam: Salt water or fresh water.

Auram: Weather.

Corpus: Men or women.

Herbam: Trees or food plants.

Imaginem: Visual images, auditory images, tactile images, or taste and
smell together.

Mentem: Emotions or memories.

Terram: Metals or stone.

Necromancy: Corpus and Mentem as applied to the bodies and spirits of
dead people.

Damage: Any Art, as long as the effect does damage directly, either by
inflicting a wound or doing a certain amount of damage which can be
soaked.

Disguise: Changing the appearance of something, by any means.

When you cast a spell or generate a Lab Total within your focus, add the
lowest applicable Art score twice. If a spell has requisites, the lowest
applicable score may be one of the requisites, rather than one of the
primary Arts. Thus, if a magus with a focus on birds was casting a spell
to turn a bird into pure flame, MuAn (Ig), with Muto 14, An 18, and Ig
10, his final total would be 34 + other modifiers: 14 from Muto, and 20
from adding Ignem twice. If he was casting a spell to turn a bird into
another sort of bird, MuAn with no requisites, his total would be 46 +
other modifiers, 18 from Animal and 28 from adding Muto twice.

A character can have only one Magical Focus, either major or minor,
regardless of the source of the focus.

**Maker of Textured Vessels**

*Minor, Supernatural*

Textured vessels are those which have mystical patterns impressed into
their surfaces before firing. A character with this Virtue has a
repertoire of shapes: one shape per level in the Craft: Potter Ability.
Each shape corresponds to an Ability, and the character gains additional
shapes as the Craft skill increases. The character takes one season to
learn each added shape when her Ability increases, and requires the
assistance of someone who already knows the new shape desired.

Crafting a vessel costs one Long-Term Fatigue level. Each vessel grants
a +3 bonus in a single Ability. The materials used while attempting the
roll must have been stored inside the vessel. Storing materials for
Abilities in pots does not cause Warping. The first time a character
uses a pot in this way, it accepts the user as its owner, and provides
no bonus for anyone else. A pot is an Arcane Connection to its master.
Characters with Magic Resistance cannot be claimed by pots, and gain no
benefit from them.

A separate version of this Virtue allows the character to make leather
vessels, and relies on Craft: Leatherworker. It is otherwise identical.
In the African cultures where this Virtue is most common, the pottery
version is associated with women, and the leather version with men, but
this does not limit which characters can take either Virtue.

**Maker of Water Vessels**

*Minor, Supernatural*

A character who drinks from a magical water vessel made by a character
with this Virtue may swap one Ability score for the Craft: Potter score
of the crafter at the time the vessel was made. This effect lasts for
one scene or three minutes, whichever is longer. Each vessel is tied, at
its cre- ation, to a particular Ability, by its shape.

Each character knows a variety of vessel shapes, each shape
corresponding to a single Ability. A starting character knows a number
of shapes equal to her Craft: Potter score. The character takes one
season to learn a new shape when her Ability increases, and requires the
assistance of someone who already knows the new shape desired. Making a
vessel costs a Long-Term Fatigue level.

After a vessel is drunk from the first time, it takes the drinker as its
owner. Other drinkers gain no benefit from the vessel, and it becomes an
Arcane Connection to its owner. Characters with Magic Resistance cannot
be claimed by vessels. The first drink from an unowned vessel, which
establishes ownership, causes Warping, unless the drinker has
Supernatural Virtues. Similarly, drinking from a vessel one does not own
causes Warping, unless the drinker has Supernatural Virtues.

A separate version of this Virtue allows the character to make leather
vessels, and relies on Craft: Leatherworker. It is otherwise identical.
In the African cultures where this Virtue is most common, the pottery
version is associated with women, and the leather version with men, but
this does not limit which characters can take either Virtue.

**Male Guild Sponsor**

*Free, Social Status*

The character's father or husband is a guild craftsman and she has been
allowed entry into his field of work, which is otherwise restricted to
men. The character may work at her trade, following the same procedures
as the regular male workers. Every guild allows such members, so she may
practice any craft she desires. The character must select a separate
guild Social Status Virtue as well as this free Virtue to represent her
status in the guild system. This Virtue is only available to female
characters, and is compatible with all Social Status Virtues reflecting
status in a guild.

**Mamluk**

*Minor, Social Status*

You are a former military slave, bought as a child, trained at a
military school and educated in Islam, and then freed upon reaching
adulthood. You are probably Turkish, but you may also be Mongol or even
Greek. You are likely to have been trained in the use of lances, bows,
shields, chainmail, and lamellar armor (same statistics as chainmail)
and one or two swords, both on foot and on horseback, though this does
not necessarily mean that you will own these at the start of the game
(storyguide's option).

You may take Martial Abilities at character creation, and as a special
case you may also take the Ability Theology: Islam, even if you do not
have the Minor General Virtue Educated. This Virtue is only available to
male characters, and (for Companion characters only) is compatible with
both the Emir and *Muqta'* Virtues, as many Mamluks have climbed high in
the Muslim hierarchy.

**Marshal**

*Minor, Social Status*

A noble's stables require a specialist to coordinate the care, feeding,
and welfare of the animals. This person is called a marshal, and the
title holds considerable honor. The Marshal of England is the king's
official in charge of his cavalry, but even the marshal of a baron is an
important personage, given the vital roles played by horses in warfare
and hunting, as well as routine travel.

A marshal should take the Ability Profession: Marshal, which deals with
understanding, purchasing, and caring for horses. It functions as the
Ability Medicine for the purpose of treating veterinary diseases, and
for surgery involving these animals. A marshal receives 50 extra
experience points at character generation to spend on the abilities
Animal Handling, Etiquette, Hunt, Latin, Profession: Marshal and Ride,
and may take Martial Abilities freely.

A marshal may overseen other specialists, including farriers who make
horseshoes; leatherworkers who produce tack, harness, and saddles; and
the trained staff who administer day-to-day grooming and mucking out of
the stables.

**Master Bard**

*Major, Social Status*

The character has spent at least nine years of study at a bardic school
and is a master of the trade, called an *Anruth*. He has a teaching
position at a prestigious school, or else an official position with an
Irish clan chief; either way this earns him a Local Reputation at level
3. If resident at a school, he has an obligation to teach for at least
two seasons a year; if he works for a lord, two seasons are instead
spent composing praise poems and stories for his patron.

The character should be at least 25 years old, and must have a
Profession: Storyteller or Poet of at least 5, and also a 5 in at least
one of Area Lore, Organization Lore, Faerie Lore, or Magic Lore. You can
spend experience points on Arcane Abilities at character creation, and
have an extra 240 experience points to spend on Art of Memory,
Profession: Storyteller, Profession: Poet, any Area Lore, any
Organization Lore, Faerie Lore, or Magic Lore. This Social Status is
only available in Ireland.

**Master of (Form) Creatures**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character can tame animals and other unintelligent beings whose
Magic Might is aligned with a particular Form. During character
creation, the character may take Magic Lore, and this Virtue may be
taken multiple times, once for each Form. See page @@ for rules for
training magical (and mundane) animals.

**Master of Kennels**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character manages the kennels for a noble patron, and is responsible
for the training, breeding, and health of the animals. He has an
appropriate staff under him, depending on the size of the kennels, and
often possesses the privilege of riding with the hunt. He may be
considered an intimate and important member of the noble household,
despite his common birth, and be treated with commensurate respect. He
is also expected to organize the huntsmen --- that is, the dog handlers
--- and train servants or locals to perform that role. He should possess
the Ability Profession: Master of Kennels, which governs the care of the
dogs, treatment of their diseases, and acquisition and breeding of
hounds. The Ability Animal Handling is used for the training of the
animals. A master of kennels receives 50 extra experience points at
character generation to spend on the abilities Animal Handling,
Etiquette, Hunt, Latin, Profession: Master of Kennels, and Ride, and may
take Martial Abilities freely.

**Mastered Spells**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You have fifty experience points to spend on mastering spells that you
know. (See page @@ for rules on mastering spells.) You may take this
Virtue if you also have Flawless Magic, to give you more experience
points to spend on mastering your spells. You may take this Virtue
multiple times.

**Masterpiece**

*Minor, Hermetic*

For some benevolent reason, the magus's parens has allowed him to keep
the lesser enchanted item he made to prove himself a magus and pass his
Gauntlet. This masterpiece must be a lesser enchanted item. You should
design a lesser enchanted item that your character could make based on
his Lab Totals at character generation, following the regular rules for
construction of such a device. You ignore vis costs, as the magus's
parens provided those from her laboratory stores. This Gauntlet test is
standard for House Verditius, but a maga from another House may have
chosen to impose it.

**Mazdean Priest**

*Minor, Social Status*

Your character is an ordained Mazdean priest, initiated as a mobed. This
means that the character may carry out the various rituals and
ceremonies, such as the Yasna, Vivevdat, Navjote, marriage, burial,
official prayers, purification rituals, lighting of sacred fires, and
initiation of new priests. In Mazdean communities, your character is
held in high regard and treated with great respect. The character wears
pure white clothes and, when performing ceremonies, covers his face with
a white veil to protect the sacred flame from his breath and saliva. See
*The Cradle and the Crescent,* Chapter 5 for more details on Mythic
Zoroastrianism.

As a mobed, your character resides in a community that likely has a fire
temple. This means that your character has arduous and time-consuming
religious and ceremonial duties. Most of your time is spent praying,
performing ritual purification rites and tending to the sacred fire. If
you are Wealthy, you have several ervads (junior priests) who perform
many of the more arduous tasks. If you are Poor, it likely reflects the
poor station of Mazdeans in the community in general, and you may also
possess the Outsider Flaw.

Your character may take Academic Abilities at character generation. Most
such characters take the Minor Personality Flaw Vow to reflect your
constant state of ritual purity, and dedication to your community. This
can only be your character's social status if he lives in a Mazdean
community, all of which are to the east of Mythic Europe, and most of
which are in Persia. A Mazdean priest in exile in Europe should take a
different Social Status Virtue or Flaw, as discussed earlier. This
Virtue is only available to male characters.

**Mendicant Friar**

*Minor, Social Status*

You are a follower of St. Francis or St. Dominic going among the rich
and poor, spreading the word of God and giving comfort to the sick,
homeless, hungry, or dying. You are sworn to serve the Church for the
rest of your life, but your wandering habits are considered suspect by
the local bishop and parish clergy, and you lack political influence
within the organization. Like all clerics, however, you are only subject
to canon law.

Due to your training, you may take Academic Abilities during character
generation. If you wish, you may be an ordained priest and may officiate
at marriages, baptisms, funerals, and the Mass, though the parish clergy
may resent your interfering on their "turf." You do not need to take the
Priest Virtue in addition to this one if you do want to be ordained.

You have sworn vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience, which could
together constitute a Major Story Flaw (Monastic Vows, see page @@), and
which would be a natural choice if you take this Virtue. You may not
take the Wealthy Virtue or Poor Flaw. This Virtue is only available to
male characters, and is compatible with the Magister in Artibus Major
Virtue.

**Mentored by Demons**

*Minor, General, Tainted*

A character mentored by demons learns faster than is possible for those
studying with human teachers, but demons only teach those Abilities that
suit their plans for the character. Characters trained by demons may
exceed the maximum skill level for a given age provided by the character
creation rules. Students of demons may also have Abilities that are
usually restricted to suitable backgrounds. People mentored by demons do
not recognize the supernatural nature of their teachers --- many
consider their exceptional skills an expression of their innate
superiority to others. This attitude is particularly common in children
afflicted with Pride. Mentored characters have an additional 50
experience points to spend on any Ability. Characters may purchase this
Virtue multiple times, and gain 50 further experience points each time.
Characters trained to this extreme know that their teachers are
supernatural figures, but often have the Manufactured Ignorance Flaw.

**Mercenary Captain**

*Minor, Social Status*

You lead a small company of mercenaries (5 to 10), for hire to the
highest bidder. You are much like a knight-errant, only without the
prestige. During your travels you have gained great wealth --- and
squandered it --- several times over. You may take Martial Abilities
during character generation.

If you are Poor, you lead only a couple of other mercenaries, but you
and they may have armor and weapons available to normal characters. If
you are Wealthy you lead about twenty mercenaries, and can delegate some
of the work to sergeants. This Virtue is available to male and female
characters.

**Merchant**

*Free, Social Status*

You live from the buying and selling of goods. You may be a peddler, if
you are relatively poor, a shopkeeper, or a traveling merchant. The
Wealthy Major Virtue and Poor Major Flaw affect you normally.

**Merchant Adventurer**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character is in command of a ship, and a crew. The character has
sufficient capital for a cargo, but may have substantial debts, which
may be represented by the Favors Flaw. See *City and Guild* for more
details on trade. A merchant adventurer who owns a share of the company
he works for should select the Partner Virtue instead of this one.

**Mercurian Magic**

*Major, Hermetic*

Your magical lineage and traditions are from the Roman priests of
Mercury, which predate the Order of Hermes, making you especially
skilled with Ritual Magic and magic used in conjunction with others. In
addition to your standard spell allocation, you also know Wizard's Vigil
(page @@) at a level equal to the highest level of Ritual spell that you
know, and should you invent or learn a Ritual spell of higher level, you
automatically invent a Wizard's Vigil spell of the same level, without
needing to spend extra time.

When casting a spell using Wizard's Vigil (page @@) or other spells,
such as Wizard's Communion (page @@), with the same function, you may
add your Mastery score (page @@) in the spell being cast and your
Mastery score in Wizard's Vigil to the effective level of the Wizard's
Vigil.

Finally, any Ritual spells which you cast have only half the usual vis
requirement. If cast as part of a Wizard's Vigil, all the participants
need to have this Virtue to gain this benefit.

All known members of the Mercurian lineage also have the Minor Flaw
Ceremonial Spontaneous Magic.

**Method Caster**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You are excellent at formulaic spells, as you have perfected a
consistent and precise method for casting them. You gain a +3 bonus to
the Casting Total of any Formulaic or Ritual spell you cast. However, if
you vary at all from your precise method (by altering your gestures or
voicing), you do not get this bonus.

**Mild Aging**

*Minor, General*

The character's aging rolls benefit from a +1 bonus to the Living
Conditions Modifier, in addition to whatever his social standing
normally offers him. Furthermore, he receives a +3 bonus to rolls to
survive an aging crisis. He may be dedicated to living a healthy life,
or else have been blessed by some supernatural being.

**Minor Enchantments**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character has one or more items in his possession that have magical
powers. These should be designed as Hermetic enchantments, and the total
levels of powers in all the items, after adjustment for uses per day and
so forth, must be 25 or less. The character may take this Virtue more
than once: add the total levels together, but no single power can be
greater than 30th level. If he loses the item or it is destroyed, then
it is gone for good.

**Minor Magical Focus**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your magic is particularly attuned to some narrow field, such as
self-transformation, birds of prey, or healing. In general, the field
should be slightly narrower than a single Technique and Form
combination, although it may include restricted areas of several such
combinations. Healing, for example, is a part of Creo Corpus, Creo
Animal, and possibly Creo Herbam. You cannot be focused on a laboratory
activity, such as creating charged items, although a focus does apply to
laboratory activities.

Sample Minor Magical Foci

This list is merely exemplary; other foci are possible.

Animal: Birds of prey, canines, mustelidae.

Aquam: Stagnant water, small streams.

Auram: Wind, rain, lightning.

Corpus: Aging, disease.

Herbam: Fruiting, wood.

Imaginem: A particular color or sound.

Mentem: Anger, lust, erasing memories, changing memories.

Terram: Creating metals, destroying stone.

Healing: Applies to people, animals, and plants.

Self-transformation: Applies to both Corpus and Mentem.

When you cast a spell or generate a Lab Total within your focus, add the
lowest applicable Art score twice, as for a Major Magical Focus (page
@@).

A magus may only have one Magical Focus, whether major or minor,
regardless of the source of the focus.

**Muqta' (Muq-Ta')**

*Major, Social Status*

You are an important emir, entrusted with an iqta' (iq-TAW', similar to
a feudal fief)*.* All rules for the Landed Noble Virtue apply, except
that most Muslims take the Minor Status Virtue Emir, rather than Knight.

**Muse**

*Minor, Supernatural*

A muse possesses that rare beauty that encourages others to rise to
worthiness. A character with this Virtue may grant Free Expression to a
single other character, or can double the effect of Free Expression that
a single character already possesses, while the muse is with him. The
artist typically holds the muse in such high regard that he feels the
need to continually improve, both in artistic technique and as a person,
to be worthy of the muse's attention. Muses may be of either sex, and
need not have beautiful bodies.

**Mystical Choreography**

*Minor, Hermetic*

The magus's skill at manipulating the shape and movement of the body
allows him to reduce the amount of time required to perform Ceremonial
Magic. The character performs ceremonies as per page @@, but requires
only five minutes per magnitude. If the character has a prepared space,
no matter how temporary, this falls to one minute per magnitude.

This Virtue is particularly important to those Jerbiton magi who use
ceremonial casting to overcome the penalties associated with the
Dominion.

**Mythic Blood**

*Major, Hermetic*

You are a blood descendant of either a wizard of legend (possibly one of
the Twelve Founders, or some other ancient and powerful sorcerer) or a
supernatural being (such as a dragon).

Your potent Gift means that you do not lose Fatigue levels if your
Casting Total falls short of the level of a formulaic spell by ten
points or less, although you do lose Fatigue if the spell fails
completely. When casting Ritual spells, lose three fewer Fatigue levels
than normal. This means that you lose no Fatigue levels if you succeed,
or fail by ten points or less. You must expend Fatigue normally to cast
Spontaneous magic, and if you fail to cast a Formulaic spell you lose
the normal number of Fatigue levels.

Additionally, you may choose one special magic feat which you can invoke
at will and cancel at will, as often as you like. Invoking this feat
takes as long as fast-casting a Mastered Formulaic spell (see page @@),
and requires the same level of concentration. The effect should be
designed as a non-Ritual Hermetic effect, with a level + Penetration
limited as below. The Penetration of the effect is not modified by the
magus's Penetration Ability score, and cannot be negative, so that the
highest possible level of the effect is 30.

**Invocation** Speak and gesture Speak Gesture Neither speak nor gesture

Level + Penetration 30 25 20 15

This Virtue includes a Minor Magical Focus in an area related to your
legendary ancestor and a hereditary Minor Personality Flaw (both at no
extra cost). Mythic Blood is not particularly uncommon in the Order of
Hermes, so this Virtue does not grant any Reputation.

**Natural Leader**

*Minor, General*

The character is a dominant person with a demeanor that encourages
others to do what he says. His self-assured manner gives him a +3 bonus
to rolls in social situations in which he takes the lead; people are
more likely to follow his orders or do as he suggests. If he is Gifted,
this bonus can temporarily help to overcome the social penalty of The
Gift, due to the strength of his domineering personality.

**Nephilim**

*Free, Mythic Companion*

You are one of the Nephilim, and a Mythic Companion (page @@). You
receive the Strong Angelic Heritage Virtue free.

**Notary**

*Minor, Social Status*

Notaries are legal officials employed by lords or towns. Your
responsibilities include drawing up contracts, witnessing charters,
verifying transactions and documents, and affixing a specially designed
seal. Notaries generally receive their salary from their employer on
Christmas. Notaries only have jurisdiction in specific realms or towns,
such as the County of Nimes or the city of Montpellier. The Wealthy
Virtue and Poor Flaw affect you normally. Due to your training, you may
take Academic Abilities during character creation; however, notaries may
not be members of the clergy and are subject to secular law.

**Nuntius**

*Free, Social Status*

The character is a *nuntius* (messenger), charged with delivering
messages, mail, and monetary donations between students and their
families. He is employed by a university nation and is not necessarily
educated. He is affected by the Wealthy Virtue and Poor Flaw as normal.
The character can be either male or female, although travel is obviously
more dangerous for a lone female.

**Paid Rights**

*Free, Social Status*

Medieval society has many prohibitions against women holding authority,
reflected in the restriction of many Social Status Virtues to men. These
provisions need to be enforced for them to be effective, and a woman
with sufficient wealth can often buy an exclusion from enforcement, or
even permission to do something that is normally forbidden. All a woman
need do, if she wishes to be a baroness in her own right, is pay the
king enough money that he allows it. All a woman need do if she wishes
to hold a smaller fief in her own right, not marry as directed, and not
be in wardship, is pay a large enough fine to her guardian.

A player may take this Virtue to note that a female character has paid
for the right to do a certain thing that is generally forbidden for
women. She may also take a Story Flaw that represents her family's
displeasure at this use of her funds, the frustrations of suitors who
would take her land by marriage, or other forms of social opprobrium,
although this is not required.

There are, however, a few prohibitions that a woman cannot pay a fine to
ignore. She cannot pay a fine to do anything that only men are permitted
to do in the administrative structure of the Church, which includes
universities and cathedral schools. She could pay a fine to be allowed
to study at a university, but not to graduate and gain the accompanying
social status. Similarly, a woman cannot pay a fine to be ordained into
Minor or Holy Orders, for example as a priest. It is also difficult for
a woman to gain the rank of knight. There are some examples of female
knights in folklore, so it is not impossible. But a female knight needs
an unusual back story, and really ought to have a Story Flaw reflecting
that.

This Virtue is only available to female characters, and is compatible
with any Social Status that is normally restricted to men, and any
Social Status compatible with the Social Status acquired through the
paid rights.

**Partner**

*Major, Social Status*

The character has a large financial stake in a wealthy trading company.
This provides sufficient income for the character to live as well as a
minor member of the nobility, but without military trappings. The
company's capo is answerable to his partners, and they are permitted,
when practicable, to take their profits in service from the house's
captains and factors, if they wish. A partner may act in any of the
roles of the house without taking the Virtue that corresponds to that
role, save the role of capo, with the permission of the troupe. That is,
a partner who is also a factor, merchant adventurer, local carrier, or
urban merchant need not purchase that Virtue if she has this one.

**Peasant**

*Free, Social Status*

You live by working the land. You may control quite a lot of land and
hire people to work it, if you are wealthy, or be one of the people who
is hired, if you are poor. You are free, rather than a serf. The Wealthy
Major Virtue and Poor Major Flaw affect you normally.

**Perfect Balance**

*Minor, General*

You are skilled at keeping your balance, especially on narrow ledges or
tightropes. Add +6 to any roll to avoid falling or tripping.

**Perfect Eye for (Commodity)**

*Minor, General*

For one commodity, and products manufactured from it, the character
never fails to make an accurate assessment of value. A character who has
a perfect eye for wool, for example, can class wool by touch and always
estimate its price accurately. The character can also price woolen cloth
and woolen embroidery. A character with a perfect eye for gemstones can
always spot fake, cracked, and illusory stones. Characters with this
Virtue are prized employees, and are occasionally paid as consultants by
other merchants. So long as they trade exclusively in the commodity that
matches this Virtue, the character is very successful. If you are using
the trading rules in *City and Guild,* they gain an extra (3 x Wealth
Multiplier) Labor Points per year.

**Perfectus**

*Minor, Social Status*

You are one of the leaders of the Cathar heretics, found mainly in
southern France. Your responsibilities include preaching the Gospel,
abstaining from eating meat and dairy produce, from sex and romance, and
from other acts that ensnare you in the sinful world. You should
normally take the Flaw: Vow to represent your solemn religious
obligations. You may not take the Wealthy Virtue, as you are supported
by the tithes and contributions of your congregations. As a heretic you
are at great risk from the Church, which will execute you if you are
caught and refuse to recant your beliefs. Due to your training, you may
take Academic Abilities during character creation. You may take the
Purity and Transcendence Supernatural Abilities from *Realms of Power:
The Divine Revised Edition* (page 53) if your character has the True
Faith Virtue, but these are not free Virtues. You may, however, take
them as Virtues, as normal. More details on the Cathars can be found in
*Faith and Flame*, from page 13.

**Performance Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

In Mythic Europe, many Hermetic magi have learned how to disguise their
magical practices by incorporating them fully into a mundane task or
action at which they excel. This Virtue lets the magus conceal
spellcasting by using the actions or words of some Ability to replace
the normal Hermetic gestures and words, and lets him maintain a spell
without needing Concentration rolls.

When the Virtue is acquired, specify the Ability to which it applies.
You may choose any Craft, Profession, or other Ability with a clear
verbal or physical practice. You may not choose any Language,
Supernatural, Academic, or Arcane Ability.

There are distinct Virtues for each possible Ability, as each allows
different methods to work its actions into magic: knowing one method of
Performance Magic does not let the magus use any other Ability in magic.

It is the action or words of the practice that are the focus of this
Virtue, not the products of craft-working. An Ability that is *verbal*
(such as storytelling) replaces the words of spellcasting; similarly, an
Ability that is *physical* (such as hunting) replaces gestures. An
Ability that encompasses both verbal and physical aspects (such as
music, or mumming (acting)) allows the performer more flexibility.

The magus must actually perform the Ability to count as using this
Virtue, and other Virtues or Mastery Abilities do not remove that
requirement. For example, he cannot sing silently, although he *can*
hunt silently.

Words or gestures that are not being replaced by Performance Magic
remain as normal mystical components of spell-casting: use the normal
rules and adjustments (including Virtues such as Quiet Magic and Mastery
Abilities such as Still Casting).

*Example: Orlando is a musician and magus, and knows Sorcerous Music and
Subtle Magic. He may cast spells while he sings (with no penalty for no
gestures), plays his lute, or sings and plays. If he sings or plays
quietly, he suffers the normal --5 penalty. He can cast spells silently,
but only by not using Sorcerous Music.*

*His friend Furioso, another Sorcerous Musician, lacks Subtle Magic. If
he has no instrument with him, then, unlike Orlando, he must use normal
Hermetic gestures or suffer the penalty for no gestures.*

The magus may choose to vocalize loudly, or move exaggeratedly, and gain
the equivalent bonuses as for loud words or exaggerated gestures.
Bystanders may notice this as unusual activity, and take interest where
they might not otherwise.

**New Duration**: **Performance.** The spell lasts as long as the caster
performs the Performance Ability. Performance is equivalent to
Concentration Duration.

To cast a Performance Duration spell, the magus must succeed in a roll
(simple or stress die, according to circumstances) of Characteristic
(varies with Ability) + Ability against an Ease Factor of 3.

The spell fails if this fails, and botches if the roll botches. The
spell ends when the magus ceases to perform the Ability, but no
Concentration or Ability rolls are needed to maintain the spell while
the performance continues.

Formulaic spells must be devised with the new Duration to use this
Ability; if so designed, the spell cannot be cast without performing.

*Example: Harold knows Performance Magic (Hunt), casts* Hunter's Tracks
of the Faerie Glow *(a variant of* Tracks of the Faerie Glow*), and
succeeds with his simple Hunt roll. His magically enhanced vision
persists as long as he keeps up the hunt, even if he is distracted by
chatter or other spellcasting.*

*Example: Orlando sings while he casts a* Sung Lamp Without Flame*. The
light continues while he continues to sing, however badly, but ends when
he stops singing. Needing to convey urgent instructions to a
recalcitrant grog, he uses an enchanted device with Maintaining the
Demanding Spell to maintain the spell while he stops to shout at the
grog; before the Maintaining effect ends he resumes his sung
performance.*

Performance Abilities

Of the Abilities listed in this book, the following qualify for
Performance Magic (although not all are particularly effective, and some
may be hard to use effectively):

**Physical:** Athletics, Brawl, Chirurgy, Hunt, Legerdemain, Ride,
Stealth, Swim, Bows, Great Weapon, Single Weapon, Thrown Weapon

**Verbal:** Bargain, Charm, Guile, Intrigue, Leadership, Teaching

**Verbal And Physical:** Animal Handling, Carouse, Music

**Variable:** Craft (Type), Profession (Type)

While Brawl and Martial Abilities may be used in Performance Magic, the
magus needs to perform semi-ritualistic movements to cast spells,
responding to the needs of the spell, not to the actions of an opponent.
If the magus is in combat, then he may only use Performance Magic (Brawl
or Martial Abilities) if the player rolls a stress die with three extra
botch dice, and treats all non-botches as die rolls of zero. (This
represents ignoring the opponent and casting the spell.)

Sorcerous Music (Performance Magic)

Performance Magic (Music) is often known as *Sorcerous Music*.

Music is unusual among Performance Magic Abilities --- perhaps because
instrumental music is similar to the human voice --- in that playing a
tune on an instrument can freely replace either or both of gestures
*and* words. The magus needs to play an instrument in order to replace
gestures, but has a free choice as to whether he sings or plays a tune
to replace mystical words. Indeed, wind instruments require that he play
a tune to replace words, as he cannot sing while playing a whistle!

Sorcerous Music can be performed as singing-only and not replace
gestures (with normal spellcasting penalties or the benefits of *Subtle
Magic*), or can be performed without singing (if the magus plays an
instrumental tune), but cannot be performed silently.

When using Voice Range with Sorcerous Music, the spell carries as far as
the music (song or instrument) could be heard. For some loud
instruments, this may be a long way.

Recognizing Performance Magic

Most people do not recognize performing an Ability as spellcasting, so
the performer may act more openly than most magi; even other Hermetic
magi do not automatically recognize his actions.

If a Hermetic magus contemplates Fast Casting to oppose a spell and the
caster is using Hermetic words and gestures, a magus may determine the
Form automatically (page @@). In other circumstances, the magus must
work the Form out.

**Determining the Form of a Magical Effect: Stress Die + Perception +
Awareness vs. 15 -- effect magnitude**

If the spell is being cast with mundane words or gestures, the Ease
Factor is adjusted as follows:

**--**3 if Hermetic words are spoken (and can be heard)

+0 if Hermetic gestures are made (and seen)

+3 if both words and gestures are mundane

**Persona**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character may adopt one or more flawless disguises, changing both
his physical appearance and mannerisms. Choosing this Virtue confers the
Supernatural Ability Persona 1.

**Personal Power**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character has a supernatural power that he can activate at will.
This is a single power, equivalent to a Formulaic Hermetic spell with a
level of 25 or lower. The power has an Initiative equal to the
character's Quickness ­-- (power magnitude/2). It costs one Fatigue level
to activate if its level is less than or equal to 50, and two Fatigue
levels if its level is 51 to 100. You may also spend levels one-for-one
to give the power Penetration; otherwise, it has a Penetration of zero.

The effect must meet at least one of the following criteria:

The effect must be Range: Personal, OR

The effect must be constant

This Virtue may be taken more than once, and the levels added together
to create several powers. For example, a character who took the Virtue
twice could have a power with a level of 30 and a Penetration of 0, and
a second power with a level and Penetration of 10 each. Note that many
powers with a Personal Range do not need a Penetration score, as they do
not need to Penetrate the caster's Magic Resistance (if any), and cannot
affect any other target. If the character is likely to want to affect
creatures with Magic Resistance while under the effect of the Personal
Power, then Penetration may be valuable (see the Hermetic Magic chapter
for further details on the functioning of Penetration).

This Virtue may be associated with any supernatural realm. If you have
access to other books, such as *Realms of Power: The Divine, Realms of
Power: The Infernal, Realms of Power: Faerie,* or *Hedge Magic Revised
Edition*, you may want to base the power on a different system of
supernatural powers, to get something more appropriate to the character.
If you do, remember that the levels of effects may work on different
scales for different systems, and you may want to change the number of
levels of effect. The power must be associated with the same
supernatural realm as the system on which it is based. (If you have
access to other books, you may want to restrict powers based on Hermetic
magic to the Magic realm.)

**Personal Vis Source**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You have exclusive access to a supply of raw vis. Determine the amount
and type with the help of your troupe; the yield should be about one
tenth as much as the player covenant expects to gather per year at the
beginning of the saga. The yield of your source does not normally change
over the course of time, even if the covenant uncovers new sources.

**Physician of Salerno**

*Minor, General*

The character has attended the famed School of Salerno, the pre-eminent
source of medical learning. Not only does he carry the reputation of the
school with him (granting a Reputation of Physician of Salerno 2), but
he has also learned some unique medical procedures such as the
preparation of anesthetics. This Virtue grants an additional 50
experience points to spend on Medicine, Philosophiae, and medical
formulae (if you are using the rules in *Art and Academe,* Chapter
Five). To take this Virtue, you must be able to take Academic Abilities.

**Piercing Gaze**

*Minor, General*

By staring intently at people you make them feel uneasy, as if you are
peering into their souls. Those with ulterior motives, uneasy
consciences, or lying tongues must make rolls against an appropriate
Personality Trait, Guile, or whatever the storyguide deems appropriate,
to remain calm. Furthermore, you gain a +3 to rolls involving
intimidation. Faeries and demons are unfazed by your power.

**Potent Magic**

*Minor or Major, Hermetic*

The maga's magic is particularly attuned to a narrow field, much as in a
Magical Focus. The benefits of Potent Magic are compatible with a
Magical Focus; unlike a Magical Focus, a maga may have more than one
area of Potent Magic, although only one Potent Magic Virtue applies to
any single activity.

Potent Magic provides the maga with a bonus in her field of magic, and
permits her to devise Potent spells that gain a casting bonus from the
sympathetic magic in shapes and materials. Potent Magic can be taught as
an alternative to a Magical Focus.

Minor Potent Magic covers the same narrow fields as a Minor Magical
Focus, and grants a +3 bonus to Lab Totals and Casting Score.

Major Potent Magic covers the same wide fields as a Major Magical Focus,
and grants a +6 bonus to Lab Totals and Casting Score.

A maga with Potent Magic may also invent new Potent spells within the
field of her Potent Magic, and may vary spells she knows.

**Potent Spells**

A Potent spell has a bonus known as its Potency, which is arrived at by
combining one or more Casting Items into the design of the spell.
Casting Items use the factors given in the Shape and Material Bonus
table (page @@): each Casting Item provides one bonus. (If more than one
bonus is possible, the spell design states which one is used.)

**Potency Score = Sum of Bonus from each Casting Item**

**Potency Bonus: Add Potency to Casting Score**

Potency is part of the spell design; a Lab Text for a Potent spell
includes the specified Casting Items and Potency Score. A magus teaching
a Potent spell teaches the formula he knows, including the Casting Items
and Potency Score. The level, for the purposes of inventing it as well
as for casting, of a Potent spell is unaltered by the Potency Score.
However, a magus may not invent a Potent spell with a Potency higher
than his Magic Theory score, even with the aid of a Lab Text or teacher.

Any magus can learn a Potent spell from a Lab Text or teacher, and apply
Potency to his Casting Score; the Potent Magic Virtue is required to
design a Potent spell from scratch, but not to reproduce one from a Lab
Text.

To cast a Potent spell, the caster must touch the specified Casting
Items. The items need not be large; they may be small and symbolic (for
example, a shield-shaped brooch is still symbolically a shield). If the
caster does not have the Casting Items available, the spell cannot be
cast at all.

*Example: A wand provides several bonuses including +2 "repel things"
and +4 "control things at a distance." A Potent version of Disguise of
the Putrid Aroma could use either bonus in its Potency. Combining it
with magnetite (+3 Animal) allows a design with either Potency 5
(requires Magic Theory 5) or Potency 7 (requires Magic Theory 7). The
caster must hold a wand and piece of magnetite (or a wand set with
magnetite) to add the Potency to his Casting Score.*

Potency applies only to Formulaic spells --- Spontaneous Magic allows
Ceremonial Casting to produce similar results, and enchanted devices use
Shape and Material Bonuses during enchantment.

**Potent Magic And Potent Spells**

A magus with Potent Magic may create new Potent spells or alter Potent
spells to vary the Casting Items.

When inventing a spell within the field of his Potent Magic (including
from a Lab Text), the magus simply chooses Casting Items for the design,
and then invents the spell as normal. Each chosen Casting Item (up to
the limit of Magic Theory) adds a single Shape or Material Bonus to
Potency; if more than one bonus might apply to the spell, choose one and
note it in the design. The total Potency may not exceed the magus's
Magic Theory.

A Lab Text written for this spell includes the Casting Items and
Potency, and is usable by any other magus.

In addition, a magus who knows a spell within the field of his Potent
Magic may invent a variant spell with different Casting Items (including
a variant with no Casting Items). If the only difference is a change in
Casting Items, he may invent the variant as if in possession of a Lab
Text. If, for any reason, his current Lab Total is lower than the level
of the spell, he may still invent the variant in a single season.

**Powerful Relic**

*Major, General*

You own an unusually powerful relic with a True Faith score of 3. The
relic also has one power, which should be agreed upon with the
storyguide (see Relics, page @@). As with the Minor General Virtue
Relic, the item may be built into any other item that you possess, like
a sword or a pendant.

Owning such a powerful relic is a great responsibility, and your
character should behave in an appropriate manner. If you ever behave
impiously (as judged by the storyguide) your relic will cease to
function until suitable penance is made.

**Premonitions**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You intuitively sense whenever something is wrong, or is likely to go
wrong soon. Choosing this Virtue confers the Ability Premonitions 1
(page @@).

**Prestigious Student**

*General, Minor*

The character is a son of a nobleman or a prosperous merchant,
matriculated in a university that specializes in either Civil Law or
Medicine. He has a small group of retainers with him, two or three
servants who attend to his needs while at the university. He was trained
in Artes Liberales and Latin by a private tutor, and may purchase
Academic Abilities at character generation. The character must take a
Social Status Virtue to reflect where he is in the educational process.

**Priest**

*Minor, Social Status*

You have been ordained a priest, which means that you can carry out the
sacraments of the Mass, Penance, and Extreme Unction. By your words, you
can cause the Son of God to manifest in bread and wine. As a priest you
come under the protection of canon law, meaning that you cannot be
prosecuted by secular authorities. You are accorded considerable respect
due to your position, and few people are willing to insult you.

You may be a parish priest. If you are, you cannot take the Poor Flaw.
Your normal duties involve hearing confession, preaching to your flock,
and ministering to their spiritual needs. If you are Wealthy, your
parish is rich enough to pay for a curate to do some of the work for
you, and you may be a pluralist, holding the benefices of several
parishes. Reform-minded churchmen do not approve of pluralism.

If you are not a parish priest, the Wealthy Virtue and Poor Flaw affect
you normally. You may be employed as a curate to a parish priest, or a
chaplain to a wealthy individual, or in any other capacity requiring
education.

You may purchase Academic Abilities during character generation. If you
are a priest in the western Church, under the Pope in Rome, you would
normally take the Minor Personality Flaw Vow (see page @@) as one of
your normal Flaws, for your vow of celibacy. Priests in the eastern
Church, under the Patriarchs in Constantinople and elsewhere, need not
be celibate. This Virtue is only available to male characters, and is
compatible with the Magister in Artibus Major Virtue, and with some
other Virtues, as noted in their descriptions.

**Privileged Upbringing**

*Minor, General*

You grew up in an environment where you had access to teachers and free
time for study. You have an additional 50 experience points, which may
be spent on General, Academic, or Martial Abilities. You may not,
however, buy Academic or Martial Abilities with your normal pool of
experience points unless you have another Virtue or Flaw permitting
that. The most common reason for this Virtue is that your family was
wealthy while you were a child, but if you are wealthy now, you should
take the Wealthy Virtue (page @@).

**Protection**

*Minor, General*

You are under the aegis of a powerful person, usually a noble or
high-ranking Church official (though other options are possible, if the
storyguide approves). Those who know of your favored status treat you
carefully; those who do not often pay the price. You have a Reputation
(good or bad, your choice) of level 3, which could be higher if your
protector is particularly great or well-known.

**Puissant Ability**

*Minor, General*

You are particularly adept with one Ability, and add 2 to its value
whenever you use it. Note that you do not, in general, use an Ability
when learning it, writing about it, or helping someone else to improve
it. You may only take this Virtue once for a given Ability, but may take
it more than once for different Abilities.

**Puissant Art**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You add 3 to the value of one Art whenever you use it. This means all
totals in which the score of the Art is part of the total. It does not
apply when learning, teaching, or writing about the Art. You may take
this Virtue twice, for two different Arts. If a spell has requisites,
include the bonus from Puissant Art with that Art when calculating which
Art is higher. If the Puissant Art is higher, the bonus does not apply
to the requisite.

**Quiet Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You can cast spells using only a soft voice at no penalty, and at only a
--5 penalty if you do not speak at all. You gain no benefits from using
your voice normally but gain the normal benefit for using a booming
voice. The range of Voice Range spells is determined normally, based on
how loud your voice is.

You may take this Virtue twice, and eliminate the penalty altogether.

**Rabbi**

*Minor, Social Status*

Your character is an ordained Rabbi, a teacher and wise man of the
Jewish community. He is afforded the respect due from all within his
community, who look to him for leadership and guidance. As a rabbi, your
character is expected to teach students, to study and write upon the
law, and to pass judgment upon cases brought before the Jewish court.

The rabbi must take the Educated (Hebrew) Virtue to provide the required
Academic Abilities. This Virtue is only available to male characters.

**Rapid Convalescence**

*Minor, General*

Your body can heal quickly. You get a +3 bonus on all rolls to recover
from wounds.

**Rat Up a Drainpipe**

*Minor, General*

Using a mixture of acrobatics, climbing and dodging, this character can
run through urban areas as if unobstructed. This gives a substantial
advantage in opposed Athletics rolls which represent being chased.

**Redcap**

*Major, Social Status*

Although you do not have The Gift and cannot work Hermetic magic, you
are a full member of the Order of Hermes and of House Mercere (see page
@@). There are Gifted members of House Mercere, but they do not take
this Virtue, taking the Hermetic Magus Social Status (page @@) instead.

You deliver messages for the Order, and you possess a number of
enchanted devices to help you do this. A newly-Gauntleted Redcap has
enchanted devices with fifty levels of effect, including modifications
to the level due to factors such as the number of uses per day (see the
Laboratory chapter, page @@, for details). These levels are invariably
split between two or more effects useful for delivering messages. New
Redcaps are never given items capable of killing, wounding, or
ensorcelling large numbers of mundanes; the risk of abuse bringing
trouble on the Order is too great. These will be upgraded and replaced
in return for good service, on average an extra two levels per year. You
are trained in a similar manner to magi, and may take Academic, Arcane,
and Martial Abilities during character generation. You have spent
fifteen years as an apprentice, and gained a total of 300 experience
points in those fifteen years. (See Detailed Character Creation, page
@@.) In addition, you have the Well Traveled Virtue (page @@) at no
cost. When you start to age, a magus with a Lab Total of at least fifty
will devise a Longevity Ritual (see page @@) for you free of charge, if
you wish. If you make suitable contacts in the course of the saga, this
ritual may be devised by a more powerful magus. Redcaps created some
years past Gauntlet get improved enchanted devices, as described above,
and, if applicable, a Longevity Ritual.

You are supported by your covenant, so you cannot take the Wealthy
Virtue or Poor Flaw. You may not take The Gift. You must spend two
seasons per year delivering messages for the Order. Your other two
seasons are, however, genuinely free, and you may do whatever you wish.
This Virtue is available to male and female characters.

**Relic**

*Minor, General*

You own a holy relic, such as the finger bone of a saint, with a True
Faith Score of one. This can be built into any other item you possess (a
sword, for instance). The relic does not possess any additional powers.
See Chapter 12: Realms for rules for relics and True Faith.

**Religious**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character is a monk, a nun, a beguine, an anchoress or anchorite, a
holy hermit, or similar. You may take Academic Abilities for the
character during character generation. The Wealthy Virtue and Poor Flaw
are unlikely to be appropriate.

Note that for a friar character you should take the Mendicant Friar
Virtue instead. Monks ordained as priests should instead take the Priest
Social Status. Senior monks and nuns should instead have the Senior
Clergy Social Status.

**Reserves of Strength**

*Minor, General*

Once per day, when in need, you can perform an incredible feat of
strength. For the duration of the action, add +3 to your effective
Strength score. Afterwards, though, you must make two Fatigue rolls.

**Ripper**

*Minor, Supernatural*

A ripper has two powers. He can destroy a single piece of cloth, or
disembowel a single animal, by spending a Fatigue level, at Sight range,
without words or gestures. These are a PeAn(He) 25 and a PeAn 45 effect,
each with +0 Penetration. Note that this description is deliberately
limiting: a ripper can't break a horse's leg or send it blind. A ripper
cannot sever a rope. A ripper cannot cleanly slice things with his mind.
The ripper has two, entirely inflexible, effects.

**Ritual Power**

*Major, Supernatural*

The character has a supernatural power that he can activate at will.
This is a single power, equivalent to a Ritual Hermetic spell with a
level of 25 or lower. The power has an Initiative equal to the
character's Quickness ­-- (twice power magnitude). It costs one Fatigue
level to activate if its level is less than or equal to 25, two Fatigue
levels if its level is 26 to 50, and so on. In addition, you must spend
one Confidence Point for every magnitude of the effect. You may also
spend levels one-for-one to give the power Penetration; otherwise, it
has a Penetration of zero.

This Virtue may be taken more than once, and the levels added together
to create several powers or a single stronger power.

This Virtue may be associated with any supernatural realm. If you have
access to other books, such as *Realms of Power: The Divine, Realms of
Power: The Infernal, Realms of Power: Faerie,* or *Hedge Magic Revised
Edition*, you may want to base the power on a different system of
supernatural powers, to get something more appropriate to the character.
If you do, remember that the levels of effects may work on different
scales for different systems, and you may want to change the number of
levels of effect. The power must be associated with the same
supernatural realm as the system on which it is based. (If you have
access to other books, you may want to restrict powers based on Hermetic
magic to the Magic realm.)

**Rosh Beth Din**

*Major, Social Status*

The Rosh Beth Din, or Head of the Court, presides at the Beth Din
rabbinic court. Your character must be (30 -- Int) years old to take
this Virtue and have scores of at least 5 in Hebrew, Rabbinic Law, and
Theology: Judaism. Your character may purchase Academic Abilities at
character generation and gains 50 extra experience points to be spent on
the required Abilities.

The Rosh Beth Din gains the +2 good Reputation Rosh Beth Din, which
applies across his country. This Virtue also includes the effects of the
Social Contacts Virtue and you are able to find contacts within any
Jewish community that supports a yeshivah. This Virtue is only available
to male characters.

**Schooled in Crime**

*Minor, General*

The character has been trained extensively in the criminal arts, and has
50 additional experience to spend on Abilities related to thievery. Area
Lore, Athletics, Awareness, Bargain, Brawl, Charm, Guile, Legerdemain
and Stealth are all suitable, and other Abilities may be added to this
list with troupe approval.

**Second Sight**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You are able to see through illusionary concealment and disguise,
including invisibility, and can also see naturally invisible things such
as spirits and the boundaries between regio levels (see page @@).
Choosing this Virtue confers the Ability Second Sight 1 (page @@).

**Secondary Insight**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your method of magical study is especially versatile. When you spend a
season studying one of the magical Techniques from a book, a teacher, or
raw vis, you also gain a single experience point in any 4 Forms of your
choosing. When studying one of the magical Forms, you also gain a single
experience point in any 2 separate Techniques of your choosing. You may
not put more than one bonus experience point into a single Art, and may
choose different Arts to receive the bonus experience points in each
season, even when continuing to study the same Art from the same source.
These bonus experience points are not increased by Affinities or any
other factors.

**See in Darkness**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You can see in complete darkness. Other than that, your eyesight is not
more acute than ordinary people's, and you do not see farther than
normal people would see in daylight.

**Self-Confident**

*Minor, General*

You have firm confidence in your own abilities, and have a Confidence
Score of two. You also start with five Confidence Points, rather than
the usual three. (See page @@ for Confidence rules.)

**Senior Bard**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character has spent five or six years at a bardic school, and is
ranked a *Cano* or *Cli* respectively. The character has a Local
Reputation of 2 representing his fame as a storyteller.

The character has a minimum age of 22, and you can spend experience
points on any Realm Lore at character creation even if otherwise unable
to take Arcane Abilities. The character should have at least one Area
Lore, Realm Lore, or Organization Lore at a score of 5, and has an extra
90 experience points to spend on Art of Memory, Profession: Storyteller,
Profession: Poet, any Area Lore, any Organization Lore, Faerie Lore, or
Magic Lore. This Social Status is only available in Hibernia.

**Senior Clergy**

*Major, Social Status*

The character is an archbishop, bishop, abbot, abbess, or other senior
member of the Church. He has access to the resources of the Church and
may have additional duties and powers according to his office.

You may make take either the Wealthy or Poor Virtue/Flaw for the
character. This does *not* necessarily represent the status of the
character's diocese --- instead it represents the personal wealth of the
character. Senior clergy can amass wealth by receiving the benefice of
several offices. Indeed, it is not unusual for a character to receive
the benefice from various parishes scattered throughout Mythic Europe.
He may never even visit some of the dioceses in which his parishes are
located, although obviously the character needs to employ a curate to
discharge the actual priestly duties in these remote parishes.

The character has a Reputation of level 4, either good or bad, in both
the local community and the Church.

You may purchase Academic Abilities for the character during character
generation.

Senior clergy are subject to canon law, and must be celibate and
tonsured (if male). Note whether the character has been ordained as a
deacon, priest, bishop, etc. Abbess is the only common position
available to women with this Virtue, and even such women are not
ordained. The Paid Rights Virtue does not enable women to take any of
the other positions.

**Senior Master**

*Major, Social Status*

The character has been a prosperous guild master for a number of years
and has risen to a position of authority in his guild. He has knowledge
of guild affairs and participate in the self-governing of the guild. He
may own multiple workshops and employ a large number of workers. You may
select Academic Abilities at character generation.

**Sense Holiness and Unholiness**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You are able to feel the presence of good and evil. In auras of
particularly strong divine or infernal influence, your sensitivity may
overwhelm you. Choosing this Virtue confers the Ability Sense Holiness
and Unholiness 1 (page @@).

**Sense Passions**

*Major, Supernatural*

The character can see into the hearts and minds of others, learning
their weaknesses, fears, and evil thoughts. This gives her the
Supernatural Ability Sense Passions at 1 (page @@).

**Shadchan**

*Minor, Social Status*

The shadchan is a marriage arranger, trusted by prospective parents to
find the best matrimonial match for their sons and daughters. The
shadchan will ensure a match of backgrounds, wealth, education, and
character. They are able to do this by forging relationships with all
the families in the community, and because of this the shadchan should
be both honest and a good judge of character. The role of shadchan is
open to both men and women alike and this Virtue is compatible with any
other Minor or Free Social Status Virtue.

The shadchan receives an extra 50 experience points to be spent on
social Abilities and an Area Lore appropriate for their community.

**Shamash**

*Free, Social Status*

The shamash is the servant of the synagogue and responsible for its
well-being. He must ensure that the synagogue is clean and in good
repair that it is available for all the community. He is also
responsible for waking the community early each morning so that they can
attend prayers and for making announcements concerning services, births,
marriages, and deaths.

As a shamash, the character must have the Educated (Hebrew) Virtue.

**Shapeshifter**

*Major, Supernatural*

You may change your shape into that of one or more mundane animals.
Choosing this Virtue confers the Ability Shapeshifter 1 (page @@).

**Sharp Ears**

*Minor, General*

You hear better than most. You get a +3 bonus to all rolls involving
hearing.

**Side Effect**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your magic has some incidental feature that is generally useful, though
occasionally annoying. The intensity of the side effect increases with
the level of the spell. Examples include a commanding presence when
casting that translates into a temporary +1 Presence bonus for a short
time after casting, or a calm state of mind derived from casting which
allows a bonus on Concentration rolls for a short time after casting.

**Simple Student**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character is a university student who is has not yet taken a degree.
He is typically between 14 and 16 years old and somewhere along his
university program. He receives 30 experience points per finished year
that he can apply to Latin or Artes Liberales. If he has finished his
second year of studies, he is in the liminal position of either applying
for work or continuing his education. Female characters can only take
this Virtue if they are studying to be physicians at Salerno, although
the Paid Rights Virtue would allow them to take this Virtue elsewhere.
However, at other universities they would not be able to graduate.

More than half of all university students are Simple Students.

**Skilled Parens**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your parens was more powerful, or a better teacher, than is common. You
gain an additional 60 experience points and 30 spell levels during
apprenticeship. This Virtue has no effect on your study after
apprenticeship, but you still have a close relationship with a powerful
magus.

**Skilled Smuggler**

*Minor, General*

The character can hide one item on his person, and attempts to find it
suffer a --9 penalty on Awareness rolls. The item cannot be larger than
a dagger, and the character may swap which items are hidden with a few
minutes of work. Wealthy characters often procure collapsible tools to
use in conjunction with this Virtue.

**Skinchanger**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You have a magical cloak, animal skin or similar item made from an
animal. While in physical contact with it, you may transform into the
form of the animal represented by the item. The transformation takes one
full round, and you retain both intelligence and sentience while in
animal form. Clothing and possessions (save the animal item) do not
transform, and you may be seen as a transformed human with InAn or InCo,
or similar spells. If the item is stolen, the new owner has an Arcane
Connection to you, and you may not transform until the item is
retrieved. If the item is destroyed, you can make a new one over the
course of a season, although the method varies depending on what the
item is. Skinchangers may transform into any non-magical animal between
Size --10 (robin) and Size +2 (bear). The character has the normal
physical characteristics of the animal, except that +3 is added to the
character's Soak score (in animal form only).

**Skinchanger (Dove)**

*Major, Supernatural*

This is a more powerful variant of the Minor Virtue above.

The character does not need to carry a bundle of feathers to use as a
skinchanger's cloak. She can, over the course of a week, prepare any
artistic representation of a feather, or a single real feather, to act
instead of a bundle of feathers. She may have several feathers prepared
at one time, and may use feathers prepared by any other character with
this Virtue. Most own several small pins or brooches, and in the city
where such characters are active, they have hidden additional pins in
accessible places, like the baths. Characters may also use little pieces
of stone with feathers engraved on them, which they swallow. These lodge
in the crop of the dove form, and can be regurgitated into the mouth at
will.

The character's garments and equipment change into feathers when she
shifts shape, so she appears modestly clothed when the transformation
ends. This also allows her to carry tools and weapons in dove shape,
although they cannot be used until the human shape is resumed.

The character has the statistics of a common dove when in animal form,
save that her Soak is +3 higher than usual.

This Virtue is particularly associated with an all-female magical
tradition called the Daughters of Four Fathers, found in north Africa
(see *Between Sand & Sea,* page 107).

**Social Contacts**

*Minor, General*

You have a broad range of acquaintances in a specific social circle
(specified when this Virtue is purchased), accumulated over years of
travel and socializing. Almost everywhere you go, you meet someone you
know, or can get in touch with someone who can help you. Whenever you
are somewhere new, you can contact someone on a simple Presence roll
against an Ease Factor of 6. The storyguide may modify this target
number upward for very small areas or areas where it is extremely
unlikely that you would know someone. You may purchase this Virtue more
than once, each time specifying a different social group.

**Sofer**

*Free, Social Status*

The sofer is the scribe whose role it is to create a new *Sefer Torah*,
or repair any fading or damage to an existing scroll, as required. The
sofer must be educated and able to read and write Hebrew as the act of
scribing the *Sefer Torah* requires knowledge and understanding of the
text.

As a sofer, the character must have the Educated (Hebrew) Virtue.

**Special Circumstances**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You are able to perform magic better in certain uncommon situations
(such as during a storm or while touching the target), gaining a +3
bonus to your Casting Scores and Magic Resistance. (A character only
gains a bonus to Magic Resistance if she has Magic Resistance from
another source.) You may take this Virtue more than once, but you only
gain a +3 bonus even if more than one set of circumstances applies.

**Spell Improvisation**

*Minor, Hermetic*

The magus may add the magnitude of a Formulaic spell he knows as a bonus
to his Casting Total when Spontaneously casting a spell that is similar
to it (see Similar Spells, page @@). This includes fast-casting a spell
that is the same as or very similar to one of his Formulaic spells,
though he does not get this bonus if he has the Fast Cast Ability for a
mastered spell, since in that case you add his Mastery Ability instead.
This bonus does not stack with other bonuses to his Casting Total, nor
does it stack with itself if the magus happens to know several similar
spells.

**Spirit Votary**

*Free, Mythic Companion*

Taking this Virtue at character creation makes the character a Spirit
Votary, a kind of Mythic Companion (page @@). This Virtue grants the
Second Sight Virtue for free, and allows the character to have two
points of Virtues for every point of Flaw.

**Spiritual Pact**

*Major, Supernatural*

The character has made a pact or agreement with a powerful Magical
spirit, and in return for loyal service, is granted access to that
spirit's power. The pact serves as an Arcane Connection to the character
of indefinite duration, which the spirit can use to make itself aware of
the current location and state of health of its servant.

The character can channel the power of the spirit by spending a
Confidence Point. Make a Presence + Magic Lore + stress die roll: this
is the amount of Magic Might Pool that the character acquires from his
spiritual master. The Might points acquired are always less than the
current Might points of the spirit, regardless of the roll's result. On
a botch, the character loses all current Confidence points. This action
is equivalent to spellcasting with regard to the concentration it
requires. The character can spend these Might points on any of the
spirit's powers. Penetration is calculated in the usual way for magical
creatures using the initial Might Pool in place of Magic Might, and
including the character's Penetration Ability, if any.

The character using this power does not have a Might score, just a Might
pool. He does not gain Magic Resistance from the use of this power, nor
does he leave behind vis if he is slain. He cannot be affected by Vim
spells (or similar magics) that target the Might score of supernatural
creatures. Without a Might score, the pool does not replenish; once the
character has spent all of his Might points this power ends. All powers
used have their duration lapse when the character uses his last point of
Might Pool. If this power is evoked again while the character still
possesses Might Pool, then the new points gained replace the points left
over; the two pools do not add. The points acquired by the character are
lost from the spirit's Might pool and cannot be returned by the
character, but the spirit regenerates the spent points as normal.

While the connection to the spirit is active, there is some visual
manifestation of this, which makes it clear that some supernatural
effect is taking place. For example, if contacting a fertility spirit,
fruits and grains might spring from around the character's footsteps.
While in contact with a war spirit, a character might appear to be
clothed in ghostly armor. When the character is actively channeling the
spirit, he acts as an Arcane Connection to the spirit of indefinite
duration, although this connection lapses when the Might Pool is
exhausted.

The storyguide should decide upon the powers of the spirit. With the
agreement of the troupe, this Virtue could be used to channel the power
from a spirit of a different Supernatural Realm; or from a group of
closely related spirits, such as a small pantheon of pagan "gods," but
care should be taken not to grant the character too much flexibility
with this one Virtue. A character can only have a single pact.

**Strong Angelic Heritage**

*Minor, Supernatural*

Your angelic heritage is purer, granting you a Divine Might score and
supernatural powers. This Virtue may only be taken if you have the Major
Virtue Blood of the Nephilim.

You are a divine being and possess a Divine Might (Corpus) score equal
to your age divided by 20, which increases as you grow older. This
grants you a Magic Resistance score. You contain a number of pawns of
Corpus vis equal to your Divine Might divided by 10 (rounded down, but
always at least one pawn) that can only be extracted if you are dead.
You are immune to Warping of any sort, and may not have any supernatural
powers that derive from a realm other than the Divine.

You have up to thirty levels of holy powers that may be invoked by
spending Might points. Design the powers' effects using the Hermetic
spell guidelines (or the guidelines for Holy Powers in *Realms of Power:
The Divine,* from page 46*)*. The Might cost for each power is equal to
its magnitude divided by two (rounded down, but always at least one
point). The Initiative score of the power is your Quickness.

You may take this Virtue multiple times. Each additional time you take
it increases by thirty the number of levels of holy powers you may
invoke, but has no other effect; in particular, it does not increase
your Divine Might.

**Strong Faerie Blood**

*Major, Supernatural*

The blood of the fay is strong in you. Perhaps one of your parents was
actually a faerie, or maybe you were conceived or born in a place of
great faerie power. This ancestry grants you several abilities.

First, you have natural longevity. You start making aging rolls at the
age of fifty, rather than the normal 35, and get --3 to Aging Rolls,
cumulative with any other bonuses.

Second, you have faerie eyes. This gives you the Virtue Second Sight
(see page @@) at no cost, and you can see normally in total darkness or
semi-darkness, such as in deep woods or at night. Your eyes look mostly
normal, but are an unusual and vivid color.

Third, you may learn Faerie Lore during character generation.

Finally, you get the benefits of a particular type of fay heritage, as
given in the Virtue Faerie Blood (page @@). Your specific fay heritage
is clearly visible. Choose one physical quirk, such as small horns,
literally blue blood, or eyes without irises and pupils, appropriate to
the faeries from which you are descended.

You may not have both Faerie Blood and Strong Faerie Blood.

This is a Supernatural Virtue, and you cannot lose it when being trained
as a magus (see page @@). If your master cannot preserve the ability,
you cannot be trained.

**Strong-Willed**

*Minor, General*

You cannot easily be coerced into activities, beliefs, or feelings. You
get +3 on any roll which may require strength of will.

**Student of (Realm)**

*Minor, General*

You have been trained in the mystical aspects of one of the four realms
of power (Divine, Faerie, Infernal, or Magic), and you have a +2 bonus
on all uses of the appropriate Lore. You may take that Lore at character
generation even if you cannot learn other Arcane Abilities. You may take
this Virtue multiple times, for a different realm each time. You may not
take Student of (Realm) and Puissant Ability for the same Lore.

**Study Bonus**

*Minor, Hermetic*

When given the opportunity to study an Art from books or raw vis in the
presence of the Form or Technique, your surroundings give you new
insights into your studies. Add two to die rolls to study from vis, or
two to the Quality of any text you study from. Your current Art score
determines the magnitude of the surroundings you require to get the
bonus. See the table for some guidelines.

Study Bonus Examples

Art Score Minimum Presence of Art

0 A candle flame (Ignem), a magic aura (Vim), a dying insect (Perdo)

5 A pond (Aquam), a painting (Imaginem), a caterpillar and butterfly
(Muto)

10 A breezy place in the open air (Auram), a live animal at least the
size of a cat (Animal), half a dozen plants at different stages of
growth (Creo)

15 An area of bare natural rock, such as a mountainside (Terram), a
human corpse to dissect (Corpus), at least one book on each of a dozen
mundane subjects (Intellego)

20 In a forest (Herbam), at a gathering of scholars (Mentem), at a law
court (Rego)

25 In a boat on a large body of water (Aquam), in a strong (6+) magic
aura (Vim), in a hospital full of people dying of pestilence (Perdo)

30 In the middle of a large fire (Ignem), in a building covered with
elaborate figured decoration in many media, where music is constantly
played (Imaginem), in the presence of a magical shapeshifter whose
transformations you can control (Muto).

35 Flying in the middle of a hurricane (Auram), while dissecting several
magical animals (Animal), while surrounded by scrying devices showing
every detail of the country for miles around (Intellego)

**Subtle Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You may cast spells without using gestures at no penalty. You gain no
benefits from using normal gestures but gain the normal benefit for
exaggerated gestures.

**Sufi**

*Minor, Social Status, Supernatural*

You are a Muslim mystic, seeking a closer union with God through
asceticism and rituals. You are a member of a *tariqa* of Sufis led by a
*shaykh.* While the group supports you in times of need, your *shaykh*
expects equal commitment from you to him or her and the other members;
you automatically have the Minor Story Flaw Mentor, which does not yield
any points for buying Virtues. See *Realms of Power: The Divine, Revised
Edition,* page 116, for details of the supernatural powers wielded by
some Sufis. It is also possible to be an entirely mundane Sufi, in which
case you should take this Virtue as a Social Status Virtue.

Most Muslims treat you with respect for your pious lifestyle. You may
purchase the Abilities Theology: Islam, Islamic Law, and Dominion Lore
at character creation.

This Virtue may be taken by both male and female characters, either as a
Minor Social Status Virtue or a Minor Supernatural Virtue.

**Summon Animals**

*Major, Supernatural*

You are able to summon animals to your side. This Virtue grants a score
of 1 in the Supernatural Ability Summon Animals.

**Supernatural Beauty**

*Major, Supernatural*

The character possesses that style of mystical beauty that, when
threatened, calls royal power, folk magic, and heroism to its defense. A
player may use this Virtue, once per story, to ask a storyguide to
insert a fortunate coincidence, of the storyguide's choice, into a
scene. The troupe may veto the use of the Virtue in any situation where
supernatural aid seems profoundly unlikely. Characters with this Virtue
are frequently assisted by passing knights of chivalrous inclination,
often find magic weapons, and frequently have their jailers, or their
jailers' daughters, fall in love with them.

Faeries frequently assist characters with this Virtue. Faeries
understand the classic forms of aid that beauty evokes in stories, and
so many of the magical steeds and wandering princes the character
encounters are actually faeries, watching the story unfold from the
inside.

A character lacking a positive Presence score may not have this Virtue.

**Tainted Treasure**

*Minor, General, Tainted*

The character has inherited or acquired a vast amount of treasure, but
it is cursed to cause harm. This treasure might come from an ancestor
who made a deal with demons, or tricked them out of money. It might have
been stolen from one of the secret caches that demons maintain, so that
they have wealth nearby to tempt humans. A tainted person who rebels,
and swaps the Tragic Life Flaw for the Plagued by Supernatural Entity
Flaw, might be tempted to retain some of the valuable props provided for
their role. The treasure is sufficient that the character could
transform it into a source of the Wealthy Virtue. As examples, the
character could buy a ship and become a trader, or buy land in a city
and become a landlord.

The difficulty is that the wealth is cursed, so it lacks the natural
increase in bounty that is a gift from God. If traded for other items of
value, the curse moves to these items. Any venture into which it is
invested will, eventually, fail. Any building it is used to purchase
will, eventually, burn down. If it is used for a non-sinful purpose, the
treasure destroys itself: gold given to charity turns to sand, ships
used to ferry supplies to the starving steer themselves onto rocks.

The wealth may be used to purchase the services of people, who, because
they have souls, choose their own fates. The limitation that the wealth
only allows itself to be spent sinfully remains, however, so it is
likely to be given to amoral, covetous, envious, dangerous people.

The Knights Templar

The Poor Knights of the Temple of Solomon, the Knights Templar, are an
extremely important and influential order in Mythic Europe. Women cannot
pay a fine, with the Paid Rights Virtue, to take a role in the order
that is restricted to men. For full details, see Chapter 7 of *The
Church.*

**Templar Administrator**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character is technically a brother-knight or brother-sergeant for
the Poor Knights of the Temple of Solomon, but is really an
administrator for the order's many holdings and activities. While he has
sworn the Templar oath and vows, and lives a monastic life, his many
duties mean he is likely to never see active combat. He is answerable
only to his superiors in the order and to the pope. He may have
considerable influence and access to enormous resources, but no
additional time. You may take Academic Abilities during character
creation. This Virtue can replace the Brother-Knight, Brother-Sergeant,
and Brother-Priest Status Virtues. This Virtue is only available to male
characters.

**Templar Commander**

*Major, Social Status*

The character is a commander within the Poor Knights of the Temple of
Solomon and has authority over all aspects of the order in a province or
preceptory. This Virtue also grants the Temporal Influence Minor Virtue,
as the character has the ear of any important nobles or clergymen in the
area. He also has access to the considerable wealth of the Templars,
including any funds, lands, and resources, although he has no extra
time. He may levy taxes and tithes over the lands he controls as if he
were a landed noble or bishop, and charge service fees on monies he
lends, and he may even act as a judge for minor lay crimes committed on
his lands. Because of his high position, he is a well-known figure and
has a Reputation of level 3 in his area. He is expected to support the
order's crusading efforts if he is in the West, and if he lives in the
East he is be expected to participate directly. Should the grand master
die and the character lives in the East, he has the right to participate
in choosing a new grand master. This Virtue includes the effects of the
Brother-Knight Virtue, and likewise can only be taken by male
characters.

**Templar Confrere or Consoeur**

*Free, Social Status*

The character is an associate member of the Poor Knights of the Temple
of Solomon, and has taken one or two of the Templar vows. His membership
is generally temporary (although it need not be), and he may possess
other Social Status Virtues or Flaws to reflect his true station, such
as Clerk, Knight, Landed Noble, Peasant, or even Hermetic Magus. His
former outside status affects his treatment in the order --- knights and
nobles receive more respect than commoners. Women may also become
associate members (consoeurs), although they are housed separately from
the men. Associates are governed by the same rule as full members,
although they have fewer rights. Some associates may hold important
positions within a particular Templar commandery, especially if they
possess a valuable skill.

**Templar Office Holder**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character holds a position within the local hierarchy of the Poor
Knights of the Temple of Solomon, such as the deputy commander, marshal,
or infirmarer. He may give orders to brothers in his region, is accorded
the considerable respect due to his position, and has the power to
enforce the rule and its various laws, although he answers to the local
commander. Because of his high position, he is a well-known figure and
has a Reputation of level 2 in his region. You may take this Virtue with
any of the Templar Status Virtues, as your character may be a senior
brother-sergeant or senior Templar chaplain. This Virtue is compatible
with the Temporal Influence Minor Virtue. If you take this virtue with
the Templar Commander Major Virtue, then your character holds one of the
few exalted ranks within the Templars, such as grand commander or grand
marshal, or a rank that has authority over the Eastern or Western region
of the order, in which case you likely reside in Acre, Paris, or London.

**Templar Prestige**

*Minor, General*

A member of the Poor Knights of the Temple of Solomon, the character
enjoys great respect and admiration among his fellow brothers. This may
be because of a great act of heroism or piety, or because of the rank or
station he possessed before he joined the order. He starts with a
Reputation of level 4 within the Templars.

**Templar Servant**

*Free, Social Status*

The character is a servant working at a commandery of the Poor Knights
of the Temple of Solomon. He is supported by the Templars, and probably
lives in the commandery itself or close by. He also receives payment as
befits his profession. As a servant of the Templars, he is covered by
the papal bull exempting him from secular and lay authority, and is
generally accorded some respect by non-Templars.

**Templar Specialist**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character works as a skilled employee of the Poor Knights of the
Temple of Solomon, filling a crucial role for which the Templars have no
full or associate member, such as craftsmen, blacksmiths, artisans,
notaries, squires, soldiers, scribes, or translators. You may take one
restricted group of Abilities during character creation, such as
Academic or Martial Abilities. As a servant of the Templars, the
character is covered by the papal bull exempting him from secular and
lay authority, and is generally accorded some respect. This Virtue may
be taken by Muslim characters, who will typically act as translators
(and who should also take the Outsider Flaw or similar).

**Temporal Influence**

*Minor, General*

Through blood or a position of trust, you enjoy some political weight in
society. You have the ear of a leader and may yourself lead common folk
at times, if they respect your position. The more influence you have,
the more responsibility, and the harder it is to work unopposed with
magi. Grogs may not take this Virtue.

**Tethered Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You can pass control of your non-Ritual spells to others, just as if
they were the caster, "tethering" the magic to them for the spell's
duration. You may also tether a spell to an object, which can then
transfer the spell to an appropriate target when it comes into range.
This can even be done whenever you activate an effect in a magic item.
However, a side effect of this sort of magic is that all of your spells
and the effects of any magic items you activate are Arcane Connections
to you.

**Tough**

*Minor, General*

You can take physical punishment better than most people. You get a +3
bonus on your Soak score.

**Town Magistrate**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character has a position of judicial responsibility in a town, with
a small staff of minor officials (up to five individuals). The character
must be a citizen of the town, have a score of at least 3 in the Civil
and Canon Law (or Common Law) Ability, and is paid a wage or gains
special privileges in return for his services. Being a magistrate
occupies the character for two seasons each year, but he is free for the
remaining two seasons. Academic Abilities may be bought for the
character, during character generation.

**Trained Assassin**

*Minor, General*

This Virtue is only available to characters with one of the Social
Status Virtues of the Nizaris. He has completed several missions on
behalf of his masters, giving him 50 additional experience points that
may be spent on any Martial Abilities as well as Athletics, Guile, or
Stealth.

**Troubadour/Trobairitz**

*Minor, Social Status*

Troubadours are wandering minstrels and poets ("trobairitz" is the
feminine form). The tradition originated in southern France (see *Faith
and Flame,* page 12), but has spread across much of western Europe.

You are not tied to any community and survive by performing,
entertaining, or doing other casual work. You may take Academic skills
during character creation and should have a reputation regarding the
sort of material you produce and your adherence to the tenets of courtly
love. The Wealthy Virtue and Poor Flaw affect you normally, although if
you are wealthy, you are supported by someone. Your supporter does not
question your activities in any way, however.

Troubadour characters often possess Virtues such as Famous, Free
Expression, Inspirational, Puissant Performance, Social Contacts, True
Love, and Well-Traveled.

**Troupe Upbringing**

*Minor, General*

You were raised among a group of entertainers, spending much of your
childhood traveling from town to town. Rolls involving Abilities in a
selected area (which you should have approved by the storyguide) receive
a +2 modifier. Examples might include tumbling and acrobatics, knife
throwing and juggling, or storytelling and acting.

**True Faith**

*Major, General*

Through piety and holy devotion you have faith that can move mountains.
You have a True Faith score of one and can gain more. For more about
True Faith, see page @@.

**True Love (PC)**

*Minor, General*

You have found the one person meant for you in all of creation, and the
bond between the two of you cannot be sundered. Whenever you are
suffering, in danger, or dejected, the thought of your love gives you
strength to persevere. Thus, you may add +3 to appropriate Personality
Trait rolls, and add additional bonuses as allowed by the storyguide
(never in excess of +3) to activities that will return you to your love,
or save her life. In dire need, she may even come to rescue you. On the
other hand, you are tied to your lover, to whom you must return
frequently. If you do not, you may suffer penalties to most actions
requiring spirit due to melancholy. If any enchantment keeps you from
your true love's side, the power of your devotion can probably break it.
Your True Love is another player character, who must also have this
Virtue. True Love is never one-sided.

This Virtue may be renamed 'True Friend' to cover equally close
attachments which are not romantic.

**Turb Trained**

*Minor, Social Status*

This character has grown up at the covenant, been trained to fight in
the turb, and picked up a few things from the magi's trusted servants.
At character creation, he is allowed to learn Martial Abilities. He may
also learn whichever single dead language the magi speak in addition to
his local tongue. His fortunes are tied to the turb, and he is thus
prohibited from being Wealthy or Poor.

**Unaffected by The Gift**

*Minor, General*

The character is not affected by the negative effects of The Gift or
Magical Air in others. Even a Blatant Gift does not especially bother
the character.

**Unaging**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You do not suffer the effects of age. In game terms, your aging points
do not decrease your Characteristics, only building up to give you
Decrepitude points. If a crisis is not potentially fatal, you suffer no
ill-effects. You may die from terminal and potentially fatal crises,
according to the normal rules. You are not enfeebled when you reach four
Decrepitude points, but you die as normal when you reach five. You may
choose your apparent age freely, although if you are basically human it
should be less than or equal to your actual age.

**Unbound Tongue**

*Minor, Supernatural*

Whenever the character is transformed into a non-human form (whether by
spell, magic item, curse, or a heartbeast) he may speak any human
languages he knows with no impediment. If he is a magus, he may use his
voice as normal to cast spells.

**University Grammar Teacher**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character is employed by a university to teach its younger members
grammar. The character can be of any age and either gender. He may
purchase the Academic Abilities: Latin and Artes Liberales at character
generation, and should have a score in Teaching. He must teach two
seasons out of the year.

**Variable Power**

*Minor, Supernatural*

One of the character's magic powers (Greater, Lesser, Personal, or
Ritual) becomes more powerful over time, based on either (age / 10),
(Might Score / 5), Warping Score, or his score in an appropriate
Ability. (Age and Warping should not be allowed as variables if the
character is immune to their effects.) For example, an effect that
allows the character to change his shape into an animal might be
associated with a special Ability, and his score in that Ability would
determine how many different animals he could become.

Generally speaking, a single power can have its effect level increased
by five, or include another effect of the same level that is similar the
original, for each level of variance. For a character with Variable
Powers based on his age, for example, this would mean the effectiveness
of one of his powers would be increased by a total of five magnitudes
after he has lived for 50 years.

This Virtue may be taken more than once, if the character has more than
one power, but it only applies once to a single power.

**Venditor**

*Major, Social Status*

The character is a venditor, a selling-agent for a Verditius maga,
bartering her goods to other interested mundane parties. He is most
likely a minor noble, ousted merchant-guild master, or defrocked cleric.
He may select Academic Abilities at character generation. You also
receive 50 additional experience points that you can put in Bargain,
Charm, Folk Ken, Guile, Intrigue, or any Living Language.

**Venus' Blessing**

*Minor, General*

People are often attracted to you. You get +3 on Communication and
Presence rolls with sexually compatible characters in appropriate
situations. At times you can put this to good use. At other times it's
an annoyance.

**Verditius Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You have been initiated into the Outer Mystery of Verditius Magic (see
page @@), and thus are a member of House Verditius. Note that all
Verditius magi gain this Virtue for free at character creation.

**Voice of the (Land)**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character can speak with any creature whose natural habitat is a
particular environment associated with this Virtue (including animals
and magic beings), and the character is not normally perceived as either
a threat or a prey object by these creatures.

**Vulnerable to Folk Tradition**

*Minor, Hermetic*

The magus's magic is susceptible to various folk-remedies for averting
hostile spells. Any target who is aware that the magus has just used his
magic may attempt a folk ritual such as making a sign against evil, or
spitting, and so forth. This grants the target or targets a Magic
Resistance equal to (5 x the target's Magic Lore), or 0 if the target
does not have this Ability, against the magus's magic only. Furthermore,
someone with Magic Lore may be able to devise a manner to break a
lasting enchantment, such as sprinkling with salt or lying on an iron
bed; this typically requires an Intelligence + Magic Lore roll against
an Ease Factor of (9 + the spell's magnitude) or greater.

**Wanderer**

*Free, Social Status*

You are not tied to any community, and survive by doing casual work of
some sort. The Wealthy Major Virtue and Poor Major Flaw affect you
normally, although if you are Wealthy you are supported by someone or
some institution. Your supporter does not question your activities in
any way, however.

**Warrior**

*Minor, General*

You have been trained to fight, and may have spent some time
campaigning, perhaps on one of the Crusades. You may acquire Martial
Abilities during character creation, and gain an additional 50
experience points which must be spent on Martial Abilities.

**Ways Of The (Land)**

*Major, General*

You have a deep understanding of a type of terrain, feeling more natural
and at home there than anywhere else. Examples include Ways of the
Forest, Ways of the Mountain, Ways of the Steppe or Ways of the Town.
You get a +3 bonus to all rolls, including combat and Casting Scores,
that directly involve that area and its inhabitants; mundane, magical,
or faerie. In addition, you roll one fewer botch die than normal (which
may mean you roll no botch dice) in rolls that pertain to your area of
understanding. You are not normally molested by animals of the terrain,
and though particularly vicious creatures may still attack you, at least
they'll accord you proper respect. (For Ways of the Town, this still
applies to town animals, of which there are plenty in the medieval
world, rather than people. The +3 bonus does apply to people.) You may
choose this Virtue multiple times, for different types of terrain.

**Wealthy**

*Major, General*

You are a rich member of your class. You may spend three seasons per
year on study or adventuring, as you can pay people to look after your
interests, and these seasons are genuinely free. Exactly how wealthy you
are depends on your social class; a noble would have at least a dozen
servants, including some bodyguards, while a wealthy townsman would have
a good house and maybe three servants. Whatever your class, you are
wealthy enough to afford goods generally associated with a higher class,
and thus risk being labeled a vulgar social climber. Wealthy characters
may live at a covenant, but they are not supported by the covenant. As
all Hermetic magi are supported by their covenant, no magi may take this
Virtue.

**Well-Traveled**

*Minor, General*

You have journeyed extensively in this part of the world and find it
easy to get along with people throughout the area. You have fifty bonus
experience points to spend on living languages, Area Lores, and Bargain,
Carouse, Charm, Etiquette, Folk Ken, or Guile.

**Whistle Up The Wind**

*Major, Supernatural*

You can create winds by whistling. This Virtue grants a score of 1 in
the Supernatural Ability Whistle Up The Wind.

**Wilderness Sense**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You are mystically attuned to the ways of the wilderness. Choosing this
Virtue confers the Ability Wilderness Sense 1 (page @@).

**Wisdom from Ignorance**

*Minor, Supernatural*

One school of Sufis found in Egypt is particularly interested in
calligraphy, and the aesthetics of the enigma. By this, they mean that
pondering texts which have been structured as mean- ingful, but which
the viewer cannot read, can be used as a form of meditation which brings
enlightenment. They are able to use books as sources of training
provided they are *unable* to read the language they are written in.

The sufis use this ability to gain understanding of spiritual matters,
so players should create Ability books normally, and when sufis use this
Virtue, switch the Ability learned from the book to Theology,
Organisation Lore: Sufis or similarly uplifting subjects. A sufi using
this Virtue may occasionally gain experience in materially practical
Abilities, but this only occurs in the context of overcoming specific
challenges on spiritual journeys. Directly applicable learning like this
is considered a miracle by the sufi, and troupes should police this like
any other miracle.

**Wise One**

*Minor, Social Status*

You belong to a broad class that includes mystics, seers, healers, and
the like. You are probably magical, and will probably want to purchase a
Virtue that gives you some sort of supernatural ability. You are well
regarded in the community, although your presence may cause fear as well
as awe or respect. If you lack such good standing, though, you are most
likely a wanderer or an outcast. You may take either Arcane or Academic
Abilities, but not both, at character creation. The Wealthy Virtue and
Poor Flaw affect you normally. This Virtue is available to male and
female characters.

**Withstand Casting**

*Minor, Hermetic*

If a magus has this Virtue, then whenever he is about to lose Fatigue
from casting a spell, he loses 1 less Fatigue level than normal, with a
minimum of 1 Fatigue level --- but if the spell would have been cast
without Fatigue loss, then he still loses no Fatigue.

A magus may take the Virtue more than once, and withstand 1 Fatigue
level for each level of the Virtue, although the minimum Fatigue loss
remains. If he has Withstand Casting (3), he may withstand up to 3
Fatigue levels lost, with a minimum of 1 level lost.

The Virtue decreases the severity of the Fatigue lost in the exact
manner of the existing Fatigue loss. Thus, if the magus casts a
Formulaic spell, the Fatigue is short-term Fatigue, easily recovered,
and if he runs out of Fatigue levels he is rendered unconscious, loss of
extra Fatigue levels results in him being unconscious for one hour for
each overflowing level, and the respite of Withstand Casting lessens
this. If, on the other hand, he casts a Ritual spell, then the Fatigue
is long-term Fatigue, and losing more Fatigue than he has remaining
causes wounds --- the respite of Withstand Casting reduces the severity
of wounds, and this may result in him taking no wounds (with the minimum
Fatigue lost rendering him unconscious).

You may not start your character with both Vulnerable Casting and
Withstand Casting. However, she may acquire both in the course of play
(Withstand Casting from Initiation rituals or beneficial Twilight
effects; Vulnerable Casting from Ordeals or bad Twilight effects). If
this occurs, apply the extra loss from Vulnerability first, then
withstand the increased loss.

Some Virtues, such as Life Boost and Life-Linked Spontaneous Magic,
actually use the magus's life-force to power the spell: the lost Fatigue
powers the spell, and without that loss, no power boost is possible.
While a magus may choose to apply Withstand Casting to such a spell, if
he does then he loses the benefits from withstood levels.

*Example: Vita, a maga with Life-Linked Spontaneous Magic, aims to cast
a level 20 spell, but falls short and only generates a level 16 result.
She will lose 2 Fatigue levels (1 for spontaneous casting, 1 for the
shortfall in Life- Linked Magic).*

*Although she has Vulnerable Casting (1) (from past Twilight
experiences) so suffers an extra Fatigue level loss, she also has
Withstand Casting (3) (from Initiations), and can use this to withstand
the Fatigue lost to the Vulnerable Casting.*

*She has another 2 levels of Withstand Casting, but if she eliminates
the Life-Linked loss, the spell will fail (and she will still suffer any
remaining Fatigue loss). She cannot Withstand the base Spontaneous
casting Fatigue.*

It is, however, useful to have the Withstand Casting Virtue even with
Life- Linked Spontaneous Magic, in case that shortfall is extreme; for
example, if the magus botches and the Casting Total is reduced to zero.

*Example: Some time later, Vita tries again, hoping to cast another
level 20 spell. However, she botches, and her Casting Total is zero. She
would normally lose 6 Fatigue levels (1 for spontaneous casting, plus 1
for Vulnerable Casting, plus 4 for the shortfall in Casting Total), but
she can withstand 3 Fatigue levels lost, and only suffers a net loss of
3 Fatigue levels. The spell fails, but she is still conscious.*

Flaws

**Abandoned Apprentice**

*Major, Story*

The character was abandoned by his master midway through his Hermetic
training. He knows Hermetic magic and can cast spells and enchant items
like other magi. He is not a member of the Order of Hermes, however.

Some Tribunals rule that an apprentice has a year to find another parens
before he is hunted down and slain like a Marched magus. Most Tribunals
rule that abandoning an apprentice is a low crime, and if the character
makes his situation known his parens may face legal action.

Decide at what age the character was abandoned. Create the character as
a regular apprentice up until that age, and then give him experience
points based on his age and other Virtues for his life past being
abandoned. If the character knows the Parma Magica, he must join the
Order or be slain.

Even if the character joins the Order, his background continues to cause
problems for him.

**Ability Block**

*Minor, General*

You are completely unable to learn a certain class of Abilities, for
some reason. This may be Martial Abilities, or a more limited set of the
others. A profound inability to master logic would rule out Artes
Liberales, Philosophiae, any Law, Medicine, and Theology. Alternatively,
you might be unable to learn any languages other than your native
tongue. It must be possible for your character to learn the abilities in
question in the absence of this Flaw, but she need have no intention of
doing so. You may only take this Flaw once.

**Afflicted Tongue**

*Minor, General*

You have a speech impediment, such as a lisp, stutter, or missing teeth.
You suffer a --2 penalty to all rolls involving the voice, and all
Casting Scores if you cast the spell using words. If you are a magus,
you must also roll an extra botch die when casting a spell using words.

**Age Quickly**

*Major, Supernatural*

Probably due to a curse or a magical disaster, you age twice as fast as
normal people. Your effective age (which applies as if it were your
actual age when creating a Longevity Ritual, and when making rolls on
the aging table) increases two years for every year that passes, and you
make two aging rolls each year. It is possible to halt or slow the
decline by supernatural means, such as Longevity Rituals, but they must
deal with your effective age, not your chronological age.

**Ambitious**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You want to be the most successful or powerful person in the world in
some respect. You will not be distracted into doing things that do not
contribute to your ambition, and are very eager to do things that
advance it.

**Anchored to the (Land)**

*Minor, General*

The character suffers from feelings of loneliness and depression when
she cannot see or hear a particular type of environment. In game terms,
the character has a --3 penalty to all rolls when traveling through any
other sort of environment (it is assumed that once the character has
time to recover from the journey, she will find some reminder of her
natural environment to help her rest). For example, a character who is
Anchored to the Sea would suffer the penalty when traveling overland,
but once settled can easily comfort herself --- with the sound of the
sea heard in a seashell, perhaps.

**Animal Companion**

*Minor, Story*

You are accompanied by a loyal, intelligent (but mundane) animal that
can obey simple commands. Your relationship with it is very close. If it
should die, you would be profoundly upset.

**Apostate**

*Minor, General*

You have converted from one faith to another or from one set of beliefs
to another. You have a bad Reputation at 4 among members of your
previous faith, and you may receive some slight distrust from your new
faith as well, depending upon how sincere your conversion seems.

**Arthritis**

*Minor, General*

Your joints are stiff and often painful, making almost any prolonged
movement difficult. You are at --3 to rolls involving repetitive
movement, sustained over time. Occasionally, the pain is so great that
you are seriously disabled. On any movement or combat botch, one of your
joints may "lock up," making the limb effectively useless (--6 to all
rolls involving it) until you have a chance to rest it for a day or two.

**Avaricious**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You want money, lots of money. When you have it, you do not spend it,
but hoard it so that you can count it. You can be avaricious about
physical things other than money, such as books or raw vis. In this
case, you do not use the things you hoard, nor do you allow others to
use them.

**Baneful Circumstances**

*Minor, Supernatural*

Something about the character's supernatural nature weakens him in
relatively common circumstances, such as when touching the ground or
when in the presence of women. At these times, the character cannot
recover Fatigue, heal wounds, or recover Might, and if at the end of the
year the character has spent more than half of his time subject to these
conditions, he must make an additional Aging roll even if he is normally
immune to aging because of a Longevity Ritual or Might Score.

**Beloved Rival**

*Minor or Major, Story*

For a Minor Story Flaw, the character has a rival who is both fiercely
protective of him and obsessed with opposing him at every turn. For
Tytalan magi, this rival is usually an older maga, most likely the
magus's former teacher, or possibly an elder apprentice of the
character's master. Much like the Enemies Flaw, the rival periodically
causes trouble for the magus; however, she jealously guards the
privilege of making the magus's life a misery, and often steps in to
remove obstacles that are not of her own making. The rival genuinely
believes that her opposition benefits her victim, and desires to see him
prosper through adversity.

If the character takes on the role of the beloved rival for another
character, then this is a Major Flaw. The character generates stories by
causing trouble for their rival, and also has to react when someone else
tries to harm them.

Such relationships are a tradition of House Tytalus, and may be mutual.
When the rivalry is mutual, the troupe may allow the character to take
both the Minor and Major versions of this Flaw. This will mean that the
rivalry will be a very important feature of the whole saga, and thus the
whole troupe must consider whether they want that.

**Bigamist**

*Major, Story*

The character has two entirely separate lives, in two cities, and moves
between the two on some pretext, most likely trade. Bigamists have two
spouses, and maintain two households, which they must pay for. If you
are using the rules in *City and Guild,* the merchant's annual cost of
maintaining his business rises by (6 x Wealth Multiplier) Labor Points.
Some bigamists mitigate this expense by pretending to be of lower status
in their alternate life, which reduces the additional Labor Point cost
by half (to 3 x Wealth Multiplier).

**Black Sheep**

*Major, Story*

You come from a prestigious family, but you have somehow estranged
yourself from your relatives. They have nothing to do with you, unless
they wish to punish you somehow or make use of you. Those who resent
your family's power can take safe revenge by assaulting you. You begin
the game with a bad Reputation of your choice at level 2, among those
who respect your family.

**Blackmail**

*Minor, Story*

You have information that some powerful person would prefer kept hidden.
You receive payments or services in return for your silence, and you may
occasionally demand special favors. Don't push your luck --- your victim
may decide it isn't worth the cost, or silence you permanently. This
benefit has a yearly value of about 50 silver pennies, possibly more if
you keep the pressure on. You should detail and record the specifics of
this arrangement.

**Blatant Gift**

*Major, Hermetic*

People immediately realize that there is something strange about you,
even if they do not know you are a magus. Animals are extremely
disturbed, frightened, and possibly enraged by your presence. You suffer
a --6 penalty on all interaction rolls with normal people and animals,
and should see page @@ for further discussion of this Flaw's effects.

**Blatant Magical Air**

*Major, Supernatural*

Only characters with a Magical Air or The Gift may take this Flaw.

The character is especially disturbing to others, so much that they can
barely tolerate its presence. The character suffers a --6 penalty to
social actions, and is immediately hated and feared by members of the
mundane population. This effect is the same as the Blatant Gift, and a
character may not have both Flaws.

**Blind**

*Major, General*

You have little or no sight. Using missile weapons is futile, reading is
impossible, and navigation in unknown territory is difficult to say the
least. Blind magi can detect targets by other senses, and thus are less
limited than people trying to use missile weapons. However, blind magi
cannot aim spells without magical aid.

**Bound Casting Tools**

*Minor, Hermetic*

The magus's casting tools, as used by House Verditius, are so personal
that they become lasting Arcane Connections to him. Regular casting
tools remain as Arcane Connections for a few weeks, his last years.

**Bound Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

When you die, all of your spells end abruptly and any magic items that
you created cease to function. You cannot take this Flaw with Harnessed
Magic (page @@), as that Virtue already includes this effect.

**Bound to (Realm)**

*Major, Supernatural*

The character is no longer able to survive in the mundane world, and
sickens if it is outside a particular sort of supernatural aura for an
extended period of time. The character must live in a supernatural aura
of 5 or greater to remain healthy; if it spends most of a season outside
such an aura, make a Stamina Roll against an Ease Factor of (9 -- Size).
If you fail the roll, the character sustains a Heavy wound, unless the
previous season it also failed such a roll, in which case it sustains an
Incapacitating wound instead. Choose the realm (Divine, Faerie,
Infernal, or Magic) to which the character is bound when you take the
Flaw.

**Bound to (Role) Role**

*Minor, Supernatural*

This character is physically bonded to some form of device, whether
through a mystic event, long years of exposure and warping, or the
ministrations of an experimental magus. The degree of the bonding is for
the troupe to define, but the bonding may be physical, such as a
locksmith whose fingers are picks, files, and keys, or mystical, such as
a watchman who is confined to his watch tower as though contained by an
unbreakable ward.

The manner of this bonding determines the kind of life that the
character may live. A watchman unable to leave his tower may make it his
home, while a coachman who has become part of his coach cannot survive
for long once separated from it.

If separated from the bonded device or place in any way, the character
must make deprivation checks as though deprived of food (i.e., a check
every three days). The effects of this are canceled if the character is
brought into contact with the device or returned to his bound place, at
which point they rebond.

This Flaw also includes the effects of the Unaging Virtue, but the
character's apparent age advances in line with their physical age.
Role-Bound characters retain the need to sleep and breathe and those not
physically bonded to a device, such as those bound to a place, retain
their other physical needs.

This Flaw may originate from any of the Supernatural Realms: a magical
origin might represent the expression of an Essential Trait, a faerie
origin could show that the character occupies an archetypal role, ready
to play his part in the wider story, while divine and infernal origins
may represent eternal punishment on Earth.

This Flaw may only be taken by grogs and is suitable for the *Warping to
a Pattern* Minor Site Hook presented in *Covenants*, page 11.

**Branded Criminal**

*Minor, Social Status*

As punishment for some crime in your past, a mark has been burned into
your cheek. This adversely affects your ability to function in society.
You may not take the Wealthy Virtue, but you may take Martial Abilities
at character creation. You may choose not to take such abilities, if
your crime was not violent.

**Broken Vessel**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character is constantly aware that her supernatural powers may only
be temporary. Failures using those abilities represent the ebbing away
of the power that sustains them. When a zero is rolled on any Stress
Roll (not Simple Roll) for any of her Supernatural Abilities, Powers, or
in casting spells, she loses 5 experience points from that Ability or an
Art involved in the Power or Spell. If the roll then botches, the
character automatically loses enough experience points to reduce her
score in the affected Art or Ability by one full level (or 5 experience
points, whichever is greater).

Characters may only take this Flaw if they have at least one
Supernatural Ability or Art normally improved through experience points.

**Brutal Artist**

*Minor, Hermetic*

This Flaw is only available to magi of House Jerbiton. The magus creates
and enjoys art that is ugly, according to his Housemates. He suffers a
--3 penalty on social rolls with Jerbiton magi, and cannot develop a
positive Reputation in the House, because his mind is so obviously
disturbed. This restricts his involvement in the leagues (see *Houses of
Hermes: Societates,* page 53). Over time, the character might convince
his sodales that his work is not ugly, but this requires stories, much
as removing any other Flaw.

**Busybody**

*Minor, Personality*

You usually know everything that is going on among your friends and
acquaintances, especially in private matters. You are always interested
in rumors and gossip, and are frequently able to extract personal
secrets from people. Among magi the language is more dignified, but the
idea is the same: you keep tabs on the Hermetic community (your
covenant, your House, and nearby covenants --- at the least). However,
magi probably don't have much knowledge of what's going on among the
lower-class members of their covenant unless they choose to apply this
Flaw specifically to such people at character creation.

**Carefree**

*Minor, Personality*

You are unshakably cheerful and happy in all circumstances.

**Careless Sorcerer**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You are slapdash in your use of magical power, and must roll two more
botch dice than normal when casting spells. Note that if you would
normally roll no botch dice, you still roll none.

**Careless with (Ability)**

*Minor, General*

The character is particularly reckless when it comes to a particular
Ability, chosen when this Virtue is taken. This Ability should be one
that is important to the character, or the troupe may veto the choice of
this Flaw. When she fails, she does so dramatically. Whenever she rolls
a zero when using the Ability, that zero is treated as a botch. She may
need to roll extra botch dice depending on the circumstances, but she
always suffer the effects of at least a single botch. This Flaw may be
taken more than once; each time, it applies to a different Ability.

**Castratus**

*Minor, General*

You were castrated before puberty, leaving you beardless and somewhat
effeminate compared to most men. Social rolls involving characters from
Latin culture suffer a --3 penalty. Under Byzantine law you may not
marry, although you may adopt children. In Byzantine culture, this may
have been an astute career move on your guardians' part, as eunuchs can
attain positions of power. Elsewhere, it was probably the result of an
accident or an assault. This Flaw is only available to characters who
were born with testicles.

**Ceremonial Spontaneous Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You need time and effort to focus your Spontaneous magic. You can only
cast Spontaneous spells using the rules for Ceremonial Casting (page
@@). This Flaw is not compatible with Difficult Spontaneous Magic or
Weak Spontaneous Magic.

**Chaotic Magic**

*Major, Hermetic*

Your magic is very wild. When you cast a spontaneous spell, you must
specify a desired level of effect. If you fall short of or exceed that
target by more than one level, the spell still works, but its effects
are beyond your control---the storyguide decides the results. The level
of effect includes any levels you assign to Penetration.

**Church Upbringing**

*Minor, Personality*

This Flaw covers children schooled by the Church and mostly raised by
clerics as well, a fate befalling some orphans, bastards, Gifted
children, and other misfits. The Church may act out of charity or a
wealthy individual may have paid to discreetly get a difficult child out
of the way. This secluded upbringing leaves the character less
knowledgeable about the rest of society, which he finds unstructured,
uncouth, and confusing. The player must spend 25 experience points from
the normal budget on Artes Liberales, Latin, Music, Organization Lore:
Church, or Theology. Unless the character has a Virtue that permits it,
no other experience points may be spent on Academic Abilities.

**Close Family Ties**

*Minor, Story*

Your family is one of the most important things in your life, and still
supports and aids you whenever possible, even at personal risk. Family
members do not hesitate to do you any favor that is within their power,
and can call on their friends and neighbors to help you. It works both
ways, however; your family will require help from you some day.

**Clumsy**

*Minor, General*

You are not very graceful and tend to drop things --- you are at --3 in
all related rolls. Furthermore, roll an extra botch die when taking
actions related to Dexterity. Roleplay your clumsiness.

**Clumsy Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You have trouble targeting your spells accurately. Any aiming roll is
subject to disastrous failure: an aiming roll of 0 is automatically a
botch. (Aiming rolls do not count as mystical rolls for the purposes of
gaining Warping Points.) You receive a --3 penalty to any rolls
involving Finesse.

**Companion Animal**

*Minor, Social Status, animals only*

The character is the Animal Companion of another character (either a
player character or a storyguide character) and therefore has little
control over his own life. He is largely dependent on his master for
food and shelter, and has an additional Personality Trait of "Loyal to
Master" which represents this bond. Among people who know his master,
the character is treated better than he would be, perhaps as that
person's pet or bodyguard. Others most likely treat him as a brute or a
dumb beast.

**Compassionate**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You help anyone who is wounded or in trouble. You cannot bear to see
suffering in others, although you happily drive yourself to exhaustion.

**Compulsion**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You have an unfortunate urge that you have trouble resisting. Examples
include drinking, sex, perfection, bragging, or gambling.

**Compulsive Lying**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

Telling the truth is really hard for this character. This does not apply
in situations where the answer is evident and any lie would be
transparent; he does not claim that the sky is green under normal
conditions. However, when he cannot be immediately caught out, he finds
it hard to avoid embellishing stories, or simply making them up. Perhaps
he wants to make himself look good, perhaps he wants to downplay his own
part in a conflict, or perhaps he just loves the power of confusing
people.

**The Constant Expression**

*Major, Hermetic*

The maga forms the center of a magical maelstrom, perpetually casting
non-fatiguing Spontaneous magic effects. The resulting effects are minor
due to the nature of non-fatiguing Spontaneous magic but are likely to
cause distraction and/or other problems. Though non-fatiguing, the
effort of marshaling the magic into less dangerous forms is tiring and
the maga is considered to have lost one long-term Fatigue level which
cannot be regained through sleep.

The effects produced by the constant expression may target anything that
the maga could normally target with spontaneous spell, including
herself, although they are more likely to target things touched by or
seen by the maga.

The maga may actively concentrate in order to suppress this automatic
magic entirely, making an initial Stamina + Concentration simple roll
against Ease Factor 3 + (Warping Score). On a failure, a further roll is
allowed every two minutes after the maga has composed herself. If the
magic has been suppressed, the maga may cast Spontaneous and Formulaic
spells normally.

In order to cast Ceremonial or Ritual magic the maga must make a
Concentration roll as described above. One attempt can be made every 15
minutes, a successful attempt sufficient to cover the duration of the
casting. Nevertheless, the maga suffers a number of additional botch
dice equal to her Warping Score.

The constant expression of magic also makes laboratory work inherently
risky. Any laboratory the maga works in is treated as having a free Flaw
providing a Safety penalty of --3 (see *Covenants*, page 111).

Penalties from foreign auras, or from effects such as Aegis of the
Hearth, may dampen the constant expression. Where the penalty reduces
the casting total to 0, no magic is expressed.

The player should decide, based on personality, sigil, and favored arts,
how the constant expression most often manifests, though the storyguide
may vary the actual effect scene-by-scene.

Conciatta of Bonisagus, a brilliant theorist of the tenth century who
extended Hermetic magic to affect the Divine, Faerie, and Infernal
realms, famously suffered from this Flaw, which is otherwise extremely
rare. Other magi may assume that a character who has it has some
connection with her. More details of Conciatta can be found in *Legends
of Hermes.*

**Consumed Casting Tools**

*Minor, Hermetic*

The character's casting tools are magically consumed after he uses them.
It takes an hour to make a new casting tool. Regular casting tools do
not allow the magus to make multiple copies of them, so he may not stock
up on casting tools. Making a casting tool for a spell that already has
a casting tool erases the magical connection from the existing tool to
the spell. The magus does not need a laboratory to make casting tools.
This Flaw may only be taken by Verditius magi.

**Continence**

*Minor, Personality*

You do not engage in sexual activity. This may be due to a vow of
celibacy, or simply personal choice.

**Corrupted Abilities**

*Minor, Supernatural, Tainted*

One or more of the character's Abilities was taught to her by a demon,
or came through some other corrupted source of study. Use of a corrupted
Ability for a selfish or sinful action receives a +3 bonus to the roll.
Succeeding in a roll because of this bonus (that is, when without it the
roll would have failed) means that the character immediately acquires 5
experience points in that Ability. However, uses of the Ability that are
neutral or selfless receive a --3 penalty, and if you fail the roll
because of this penalty, the character loses 5 experience points in the
Ability.

Any use of a corrupted Ability is an unholy act, which can be sensed by
Divine Powers. You may only take this Flaw once, though you can choose
to have it affect multiple Abilities if you wish.

**Corrupted Arts**

*Minor, Hermetic, Tainted*

The character has studied one of the Hermetic Arts from a corrupted
source. Use of a corrupted Art for a selfish or sinful action receives a
+3 bonus to the character's Casting Total. Succeeding in a roll because
of this bonus (that is, when without it the roll would have failed)
means he immediately acquires 5 experience points in that Art. However,
uses of the Art that are neutral or selfless receive a --3 penalty, and
if you fail the roll because of this penalty, he immediately loses 5
experience points in the Art.

Any use of a corrupted Art taints the character's magic, causing it to
appear unholy. You may only take this Flaw once, though it can affect
multiple Arts.

**Corrupted Spells**

*Minor, Hermetic, Tainted*

The character has learned at least 30 levels of formulaic spells from a
source that has been corrupted in some way. Use of a corrupted spell for
a selfish or sinful action receives a +3 bonus to the character's
Casting Total and Penetration Total. Succeeding in a roll because of
this bonus (that is, when without it the spell would have failed or cost
Fatigue) means he immediately acquires 5 experience points towards
mastery of that spell. However, uses of the spell that are neutral or
selfless receive a --3 penalty, and if you fail the roll or he fatigues
himself because of this penalty, he immediately loses 5 experience
points. If this would result in negative experience, he forgets the
spell completely.

Any use of a corrupted spell is tainted and appears unholy. You may only
take this Flaw once, though it can affect as many of the character's
spells as you wish.

**Covenant Upbringing**

*Minor, Personality*

You were raised in a large, old covenant that has little contact with
the outside world. You might have very strange religious beliefs, and
you certainly find medieval social and political structures very odd.
You may take Latin at character creation, and are likely to have a score
in Order of Hermes Lore. While Latin cannot be your native language, you
may speak a language closely related to Latin that is spoken only at
your home covenant.

**Craving for Travel**

*Minor, General*

The character suffers from feelings of loneliness, boredom, and
depression if he does not expose himself to new experiences. He can
stave off the boredom for a while, but if he remains in one place for
more than a season, he suffers a --1 penalty to all rolls and totals
until he experiences a change in scene. This penalty rises to --3 after
a year of boredom. This character is probably the first to volunteer for
a mission beyond the covenant gates, and may even spend part of each
year in a different location such as the nearby wood. This Flaw might
seem to make the character unsuitable for life at a covenant, so you
should decide what it is at the covenant that means he keeps coming
back. Perhaps it is the love of his life, the camaraderie, or perhaps
just the feeling that he fits in here.

**Creative Block**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You have problems creating new things in the lab. You take a --3 penalty
to all Lab Totals unless you are using a Laboratory Text or being
taught. If you experiment, roll twice as many dice on the
experimentation table.

**Crippled**

*Major, General*

You either have no legs, or your legs are completely useless. You may
have lost them in an accident or as a punishment. You cannot walk,
although you may drag yourself along the ground, or push a trolley
around with a stick.

**Curse of Slander**

*Minor, General or Supernatural*

Wherever he stays, unpleasant rumors and ill-favored stories about this
character begin to spread within a short time. This can be due to bad
luck, or it could be something supernatural, like a curse. The slander
is centered on one specific section of mundane society --- the nobility,
the church, guilds, peasants --- and it seriously hampers his working
life. After staying one season in an area, he gains a bad Reputation at
level 1, usually a Local Reputation. He gains one point toward raising
the Reputation in each further season, or more if he is involved in
disturbing or strange events. Truly remarkable deeds can halt the
increase for one season, but they will be forgotten come next season. At
a covenant, people are used to strange things and deviant behavior. The
Reputation is gained and increases in intervals of years rather than
seasons, giving the poor victim more time before he becomes completely
shunned. If the character leaves an area, the Reputation stops
increasing, and may even fall, at the troupe's discretion.

**Curse of Venus**

*Major, Story*

You are very attractive to people whom you do not wish to attract.
People you detest keep getting crushes on you, and will not be
dissuaded. Furthermore, you tend to fall in love with inappropriate
people, and in inappropriate circumstances. Those people you are
interested in tend to think you are vain and shallow.

**Cursed Guile**

*Minor, Supernatural*

This is the Flaw for "the boy who cried wolf," and probably results from
Infernal influence. The character has three extra botch dice when using
Guile. More importantly, the character is rarely believed, even when he
is being honest. He must make a Communication + Guile roll against an
Ease Factor of 9 in order to be believed when he tells the truth at
important moments. For example, if the character is returning from a
scouting mission, and you fail his Guile roll when he reports back, the
maga may assume that he has been deficient in his duties; perhaps she
thinks that he never went scouting at all, but instead went to the
nearest town to entertain himself. This character may prefer the company
of animals to that of people, as they do not respond to subterfuge.

**Cyclic Magic (negative)**

*Minor, Hermetic*

As with the Hermetic Virtue, your magic is attuned to some cycle of
nature and is less potent at specific times. You have a --3 penalty to
all Lab Totals and Casting Scores during that time. The penalty applies
to Lab Totals even if the negative period does not cover the whole of
the season. The length of time during which you are at a disadvantage
must be equal to the time when there is no penalty.

**Dark Secret**

*Major, Story*

You are haunted by something that would lead to shame, rejection, and
possibly revenge if discovered. Hints about the secret continually
arise, and there might be others who know it and could betray you. This
makes you avoid certain places, dislike certain people, or fear certain
things.

**Deaf**

*Major, General*

You cannot hear at all. You may be able to speak, but you cannot
understand spoken language, which makes communication difficult. Magi
with this Flaw must roll an extra two botch dice when casting spells
with a spoken component, as they cannot hear what they are saying.

**A Deal with the Devil**

*Major, Story*

The character has sold his soul to the devil and now finds himself
destined to infernal damnation. This Flaw includes the effects of
Plagued By Supernatural Entity as Hell's agents goad and cajole the
character, reminding him of the bargain he made and tempting him with
offers of possible release in return for just one more small service.
The character is called upon to undertake an inherently sinful action,
but the reward is always snatched away on some technicality of the
agreement or simply because of the duplicitous nature of the infernal.
Note that the character can, in fact, repent and get out of the deal by
God's grace, but the repentance must be genuine, and the forces of Hell
will try to stop it, thus generating stories that way.

**Deficient Form**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Almost all totals (including Casting Totals and Lab Totals, but
excluding Magic Resistance) to which a particular Form is added are
halved. Advancement Totals are not halved. Experience points required
are based on the actual value of the Technique, before halving.

**Deficient Technique**

*Major, Hermetic*

All totals, including Lab and Casting totals, including a particular
Technique are halved. Advancement Totals are not halved. Experience
points required are based on the actual value of the Technique, before
halving.

**Deleterious Circumstances**

*Minor, Hermetic*

All your magic totals, excluding Magic Resistance, are halved under
certain uncommon circumstances. This can be your state, such as sitting
or wet, the target of the magic, such as wild animals or iron, or the
place where you are casting the magic, such as a city or high up a
mountain.

**Delusion**

*Minor, Personality*

You believe wholeheartedly in something that just isn't so. Examples
include that you are a magus (if you are not), that you are the Pope's
child, or that your imaginary friend is real.

**Demonic Familiar**

*Minor, Story*

The character is bound to a famulus, a familiar demon that possesses an
animal and can lend the character its senses, or mask the evil taint of
her Powers. This demonic familiar is not loyal to the character or
concerned about her well-being, and often has its own goals and needs.
The character may occasionally need to bargain with it or even threaten
it to receive its aid.

At the storyguide's discretion, this Flaw may be taken to represent
other sorts of demons with which the character has a close relationship,
such as a warder, teacher, or paramour. The more powerful the demon, the
more the character will be expected to do to earn its assistance, and
the less involved it will be with her on a daily basis.

**Dependent**

*Major, Story*

You feel responsible for someone, and bound to help if they are in
trouble. This person may be a relative or friend, but should be
relatively weak and a non-player character. If your Dependent passes
beyond your ability to help, or becomes too powerful, you should
substitute another Story Flaw. Possibilities include taking the children
of the old Dependent as new dependents, taking the killers of the
Dependent as Enemies, or taking the Dependent as a True Friend.

**Depraved**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

The character seeks to undermine religion whenever possible, and
generally tries to avoid the Dominion. He might sin in public, teach
misinformation about the tenets of the faith, or show obvious disdain
for holy things. He is not necessarily an infernalist; it could be that
he simply despises organized religion, dislikes the Divine realm, or
does not believe in God. He might even be persuaded to attend services,
though he does not take any of it seriously and is likely to disrupt the
ceremony with his discomfort and ignorance.

**Depressed**

*Minor, Personality*

You have a dark outlook on life, seeing little point in acting and
taking no pleasure in anything that happens.

**Deteriorating Power**

*Minor, Supernatural*

Like the Variable Powers Virtue, this Flaw reduces the effectiveness of
one of the character's powers (Greater, Lesser, or Ritual) over time.
This penalty is linked to either the character's (age / 10), (Might
Score -- Might Pool / 5), or Warping Score. For example, a magic
character with Deteriorating Powers linked to age and an age of 25 would
have one of his powers reduced by 3 magnitudes.

This Flaw may be taken more than once, if the character has more than
one Power.

**Devoted Parent/Child**

*Minor, General*

The character is extremely attached to a parent or child. Where he goes,
she goes also. Separation of more than a day causes anxiety, and gives a
--1 penalty to all rolls due to stress.

**Dhimmi**

*Minor, General*

You are a non-Muslim living under Muslim rule. If you are adult and
male, you must pay the *jizya* head tax, and all *dhimmis* must abide by
certain social restrictions (described in the sourcebooks for these
areas of Mythic Europe --- see *Realms of Power: The Divine, The Cradle
and the Crescent, Between Sand and Sea,* and *Lands of the Nile*), in
return for which they receive tolerance and protection from the Muslim
authorities. The actual amount a *dhimmi* has to pay in *jizya* varies,
but rarely exceeds a *dinar* (a gold coin) per year.

**Diabolic Past**

*Major, Story*

You were associated with diabolists, and though you have escaped their
evil ways, you are still haunted by your upbringing and the memory of
acts best left unspoken. Perhaps your parents were diabolists, although
you were not, or maybe you joined a cult but soon repented and fled.
Your former associates still take an interest in your activities and
whereabouts. Unfortunately. You may purchase the Ability Infernal Lore,
even if you are normally not permitted to buy Arcane Abilities.

**Difficult Longevity Ritual**

*Major, Hermetic*

Something in your magical nature makes it difficult to create an
effective Longevity Ritual for you. Anyone (including yourself) creating
a Longevity Ritual for you must halve their Lab Total. You may create
Longevity Rituals for others without penalty.

**Difficult Spontaneous Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Spontaneous magic is always an effort for you. You cannot cast
Spontaneous spells without exerting yourself. However, when you do exert
yourself, you cast spells as any other magus.

This Flaw may be combined with Weak Spontaneous Magic (page @@) to
create a magus who cannot use Spontaneous magic at all.

**Disjointed Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You cannot use previous knowledge to help you with magic. You gain no
benefit from knowing a spell that is similar to one you are learning or
inventing, and you gain no enchantment bonuses from Techniques and Forms
already invested in an item.

**Difficult Underlings**

*Major, Story*

You may only take this Story Hook if your character has, and will keep,
underlings of some sort or another. No matter how many people you fire,
or how carefully you vet new candidates, your underlings always cause
problems for you. The nature of the problems may change, but you are
repeatedly drawn into dealing with the trouble they have caused. If
other people give the same underlings orders, they have no problem. It's
not them, it's you.

**Disfigured**

*Minor, General*

A visible disfigurement makes you ugly and easy to recognize. Presence
rolls that involve good looks and gaining respect from most people are
at --3. You probably have a cruel nickname that refers to your
unfortunate appearance. You might have a large, visible burn scar, or an
enlarged and deformed eye (an 'evil eye'), or even be albino.

**Disorientating Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

After casting a spell, you must spend a round doing nothing but
recovering your mental faculties.

**Driven**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You have some goal which you are determined to bring about. This has to
be the sort of big goal that could shape an entire life, but if you do
accomplish it you will immediately turn to a new project.

**Dutybound**

*Minor, Personality*

You adhere to a restrictive code of conduct that forbids certain
behavior, probably including prohibitions against lying, killing
prisoners, stealing, and other occasionally useful actions. You follow
this code out of guilt or fear rather than high-flown moral standards,
and may spend more time justifying yourself than keeping your conduct
pure.

**Dwarf**

*Major, General*

You are the size of a child. Your comfortable walking speed is
two-thirds that of a normal person. Your Size is --2, so the severity of
wounds you take increases in three point increments rather than five
point increments (see page @@). You take a --1 penalty to each of
Strength and Stamina, which may reduce each Characteristic as low as
--6. You cannot take this Flaw and Giant Blood (page @@), Large (page
@@), or Small Frame (page @@).

**Employed by Company**

*Minor, Story*

Characters with this Flaw are salaried employees, answerable to an
employer, which is normally a merchant company. They may be merchants
who travel on behalf of a company, or administrators who are answerable
to the partners. On the other hand, they are also backed up by the
resources of the company. This Flaw may also be used for salaried
employees of other organizations.

**Enemies**

*Major, Story*

Someone is causing trouble for you, such as a local baron or bishop, a
band of outlaws, or a really nasty innkeeper. The enemy must be powerful
enough to endanger you --- this is best agreed on with the storyguide
and the rest of the troupe.

**Enfeebled**

*Major, General*

You cannot exert yourself for longer than a few seconds. Any need for
rapid movement, such as combat or a chase, leaves you helpless. Long
hikes are likewise beyond your capability. You are unable to learn
Martial Abilities or any other skills involving physical exertion, since
you cannot train in them. If you are a magus, you lose double the normal
number of Fatigue levels from casting spells, but you may carry out
Laboratory activities as normal.

**Envied Beauty**

*Major, Story*

The character's beauty draws revulsion and jealousy. This envy does not
strike everyone, but vain persons of the character's gender are
particularly susceptible to it. Characters with this Flaw may avoid its
penalties by refusing to reveal their beauty to the world, which creates
its own complications.

A character lacking a positive Presence score may not have this Flaw.

**Envious**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You believe that everyone has it better than you do, and that they don't
deserve their good fortune, while you do. Thus, you try to ruin their
lives and take their goods for yourself. (This is not a good Flaw for a
player character, as it is likely to lead to conflict with the other
players.)

**Environmental Magic Condition**

*Major, Hermetic*

All of the character's Casting and Lab Totals are halved in certain
common conditions related to his environment, for example, whenever he
is inside. Note that this should be significantly more restrictive than
the Hermetic Flaw Deleterious Circumstances.

**Environmental Sensitivity**

*Minor, General*

The character is unusually sensitive to an uncommon environmental
feature, such as bad air, salt water, or extreme temperatures. Whenever
the character is exposed to these conditions, he has a --3 penalty to
his Stamina for any debilitation checks (page @@).

**Evil Destiny**

*Major, Story*

The Infernal realm has taken an interest in the character, but he does
not know how or why. Perhaps one of his Powers is actually Infernal, or
demons are plotting against him, or he is convinced that he is being
stalked by something evil.

He cannot discuss this openly for fear that he will be accused of
infernalism, but must be always on his guard against the dark forces
that he knows will come for him one day.

The storyguide will use this Flaw to subtly work the Infernal realm into
your character, leaving you unaware of the specifics. You might have
other Flaws that relate to the Infernal, but not (yet) know what they
are, such as Corrupted Abilities. The character could also simply be
Plagued by Demons or Susceptible to the Infernal. Through the course of
the story you may eventually discover what his Flaw is, but until then
you are only haunted with the knowledge that something about him is not
right.

**Evil Eye**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You character bears the Evil Eye, the uncontrolled potential to bring
harm to others around her. Characters making stress rolls in her
presence are subject to an additional botch die. Characters may protect
themselves through the use of an amulet or a ritual, decided upon by the
troupe, which does not need to be magical or supernatural in nature. A
Magic Resistance of 0 or more, including the effect of the Aegis of the
Hearth, is also sufficient to guard against this effect.

**Exciting Experimentation**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your character's experiments tend to have a flair for the \... dramatic.
When rolling on any of the experimentation tables, roll two dice instead
of the normal one. The storyguide then chooses and applies the more
amusing of your two results.

**Excommunicate**

*Major, Story*

For your crimes against God and the Church, you have been cast out of
your faith, undoing your baptism and driving you from your religious
community. You have a bad reputation at level 3 within the Church, and
cannot benefit from the sacraments.

**Exiled Atlantean**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character is an exiled Atlantean; she is tainted by her contact with
the surface world, and cannot return to her magic regio. This exile is
enforced by the very nature of the magic regio to which the Atlanteans
are native, so there is no authority figure to which she may appeal, or
any obvious method of returning to favor. The exile applies even if the
Atlantean left her native magic regio involuntarily. More details about
the Atlanteans can be found in *Realms of Power: Magic,* page 90.

**Faerie Friend**

*Minor, Story*

You have an ally among the fay. How much assistance you can get depends
on the power of the friend --- a small faerie with (relatively) minor
powers can accompany you on a day to day basis. Powerful faeries have
other business, and may only be available to answer questions and
provide guidance, not to accompany you around on your adventures. Your
ally is fully sentient, has its own powers, and can speak when it
chooses. You may want to have another player act the part. While a
faerie companion can be a great boon, it can also be a terrible burden.
If it is nasty or mischievous, it could cause trouble for you
everywhere. Characters with this Flaw can purchase the Arcane Knowledge
Faerie Lore, even if they are normally restricted from purchasing it.

**Faerie Upbringing**

*Minor, Personality*

Perhaps you were abandoned by your true kin, and the faeries found you.
Maybe your family actually lived in a faerie forest, or faeries took you
as a babe. Though you are now back in human society, you feel at home
with and have an enhanced understanding of faeries, magic, and other
strange things. However, you find human society, including religion,
bizarre. You may learn Faerie Lore at character generation.

**Failed Journeyman**

*Minor, Social Status*

The character has been expelled from a guild due to past illegal or
questionable practices. He may not practice his trade in town nor sell
his goods there. The character is expected to find another means of
livelihood, although no other guild will accept him, so many such men
must find a way to practice their trade illegally. He has a bad
Reputation of 2 in town.

**Failed Master**

*Minor, Social Status*

Either through faulty management or illegal business practices, the
character has run his workshop into the ground. He must work as a
journeyman if he wants to practice his trade legally in town. The
character has a bad Reputation of 4 in town, and it will be difficult
for him to regain his legal status as a master.

**Failed Monk**

*Minor, Social Status*

You were once a member of a cloistered order, but were cast out for some
great sin or gross incompetence, or perhaps you ran away and your abbot
might allow you to come back after a suitable punishment. Because of
this, you have a poor Reputation at level 2 in the local area and within
the Church. You no longer need to observe your monastic vows of poverty,
chastity, and obedience, though you may still practice them as they
might be ingrained in your nature. You may take Academic Abilities
during character creation.

Female characters may take this Flaw as Failed Nun.

**Failed Student**

*Minor, General*

The character has studied for a specific university license and failed
his final examination. If he passed earlier exams, he may have a
scholastic Social Status Virtue showing how far he got. (Obviously, this
cannot be Doctor in (Faculty).) The character has a Bad Academic
Reputation of 2.

**The Falling Evil**

*Major, General*

The character occasionally suffers convulsions and blackouts.
Convulsions occur randomly and infrequently; for any given event, the
storyguide should secretly roll a stress die, and if the result is 9 or
more then a convulsion will occur at some point during that event, as
chosen by the storyguide. This spasm causes random movements and
hallucinations, leaving the character temporarily Incapacitated. She
collapses to the ground and twitches, and you can make a Stamina roll
against an Ease Factor of 9 every round; success means that the
convulsion ends, although the character is reduced to the Dazed Fatigue
level following a fit. The Falling Evil is usually caused by possession
by demons (*Art & Academe*, page 48), but that form of the illness is
usually temporary in nature. The character does not seem to have a
disease, and cannot naturally recover from this affliction. It may be
that it stems from a different source. In Ancient Greece and Rome, it
was called the "divine illness," as it was believed that the gods spoke
to those who had such fits.

**False Power**

*Major, Supernatural, Tainted*

One of the character's Supernatural Virtues is associated with the
Infernal realm, in addition to the realm with which it would normally be
associated, which causes it to appear unholy when subjected to Divine or
Infernal. This quality could be because of something inherent to the
Power, or perhaps because of the interference of Infernal agents.

This Flaw can apply to Supernatural Virtues that define the character's
background, like Faerie Blood, Diedne Magic, or even The Gift. In these
cases, falsehood permeates the whole of the character's being, causing
everything she does to seem unholy to those with the ability to sense
it.

The False Power is often subtly changed by its Infernal aspect, making
it more sinister or negative. Here are some examples:

**(False) Premonitions:** The taint of the character's Premonitions
Power leaves it vulnerable to Infernal manipulation, even if the
character has Magic Resistance. Many of the character's premonitions are
accurate, and pursuit of the stories they evoke is usually worthwhile.
These valuable insights often lead characters to trust lies that a demon
offers through the Power in order to manipulate their response to
pivotal events.

**(False) Second Sight:** The character is particularly likely to see
through an illusion or deception when what he sees would lead him to
sin. Sometimes he may see through mundane obstacles, if the information
gained would tempt him to sinful acts.

**(False) Shapeshifter:** The character can change his shape, but only
into animals typically associated with the Infernal, such as a cat, a
wolf, a raven, or a rat. When in these shapes, he seems unholy to those
can recognize that quality.

It is quite possible that the character does not know that his Power is
false. Once he does, he may find himself in a moral dilemma. Most people
consider it a sin to use Powers associated with the Infernal realm for
any reason, and would label him an infernalist if they discovered the
nature of his Power. Yet his Power is also associated with another
realm, making it more difficult to recognize it as Infernal, and leaving
it unclear whether the Power is inherently evil or simply tainted by
association. Perhaps the character believes it is not wrong for him to
use his Powers, so long as he does not pursue evil ends with them.

Once the character recognizes that the Power has an unholy aspect, he
may choose to treat it as an Infernal Power at any time, using the
Infernal Power column of the realm interaction chart and thus giving him
a bonus in Infernal auras. This may also grant him other benefits: like
other infernalists he can boost his casting total with sacrifices, and
use an Infernal Ceremony to include others in the activation, as
described in *Realms of Power: The Infernal,* page 91. However, doing
this removes any illusions about the Power's realm --- even magical and
faerie Powers can recognize that it is Infernal.

If the character realizes his Power is corrupted, he may decide to seek
help from the Divine. Sincere repentance and participation in a form of
ceremonial absolution allow the character to lose this Flaw, though this
also takes away the Virtue it modifies. This is a heavy penance, but it
is the only way to exorcise the evil influence of the Infernal realm,
and of course there are far greater rewards in Heaven.

This Flaw may be taken multiple times, once for each appropriate
Supernatural Virtue that the character possesses, but in each subsequent
instance as a Minor Flaw rather than a Major one. Also note that this
Flaw cannot apply to Supernatural Virtues that are affiliated to the
Infernal realm in the first place, and the troupe may not allow it to
apply to Virtues derived from the Divine.

**Favors**

*Major, Story*

You owe a boon to someone (or to a great many people), and may be called
upon to return the favor at any time. The consequences of ignoring such
a request can range from mild to deadly serious, at the storyguide's
discretion.

**Fear**

*Minor, Personality*

You are scared of something that you are likely to encounter fairly
often. Its presence makes you edgy and very uncomfortable.

**Feral Scent**

*Minor, General*

Perhaps due to his beast blood or feral upbringing, the character has
the strong natural smell of a wild animal. Humans tend to avoid being
too close to him, and may be on edge in his vicinity without knowing
why. He may well spook domesticated animals if he surprises them. He
suffers a --1 penalty to social interactions (which stacks with the
penalties imposed by The Gift, if he has it), and develops a negative
Reputation of Unclean at level 2. However, if he has Initiated the
Sensory Magic Mystery (described in *Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults,*
page 27), any spells he casts with a Scent Target have twice their
normal area of effect.

**Feral Upbringing**

*Minor, General*

You grew up in the wilderness, either raised by wild animals or
surviving on your own. For much of your life you could not speak, and
knew nothing of human ways. Now that you have joined human society (or
the covenant), you have learned to understand some basic spoken phrases,
but civilized life is still a mystery you want little part of. You may
only choose beginning Abilities that you could have learned in the
wilds. In particular, you may not start with a score in a Language. In
your first five years you gain 120 experience points, which must be
split between (Area) Lore, Animal Handling, Athletics, Awareness, Brawl,
Hunt, Stealth, Survival, and Swim.

**Fettered Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

All of your spells and the effects of any magic items you activate are
Arcane Connections to you. You cannot take this with the Virtue Tethered
Magic, as the Virtue already includes this effect.

**Feud**

*Major, Story*

Your family is involved in a feud. The opposing family or families are
roughly of equivalent strength to your family and its allies. You are
liable to be ambushed or attacked by opposing clansmen, and your family
expects you to join raids against your enemies.

**Fickle Nature**

*Minor, Personality*

The character swings between two types of personality behaviors that are
directly opposite. There is no middle ground, so the character is always
either displaying traits of one behavior or the other. Select a
Personality Trait at +4, and its opposite at +4. Typical Personality
Traits are: Happy and Sad, Energetic and Lazy, Confident and Diffident,
or Proud and Humble.

**Fish Out of Water (Terrain)**

*Minor, General*

This character has an affinity with one type of terrain, whether this is
at sea, in the woods, the rolling hills, or in the urban landscape of
towns and cities, and feels uncomfortable and awkward when away from
where he wants to be. The character suffers a --1 penalty to all stress
rolls taken outside of their favored terrain and also rolls one more
botch dice than normal in those situations.

Appropriate areas may be Cities & Towns, Villages, Rivers, The Sea,
Mountains, Woodland, Desert, etc.

This Flaw may only be taken once, because taking it more than once makes
it less serious, rather than more.

**Flashbacks**

*Minor, General*

When engaged in combat, or a similar violent and tense situation, the
stress might trigger a flashback to the horrors of past battles, which
left this character mentally scarred. The hallucinations seem so real
that it is hard to avoid reacting to them. When an event appropriate for
the Flashbacks occurs, roll a stress die against an Ease Factor of 9. On
a failure, the character panics and reverts to his past nightmares. At
the storyguide's discretion, modifiers from --1 to --5 could apply, for
things like full-scale battle, fires, or stampeding animals. In
addition, add or subtract any relevant Personality Traits, depending on
whether they might lessen or worsen the effects of this Flaw.

Bear in mind that positive traits like loyal, reliable, law-abiding, or
calm should be helpful in avoiding this affliction. Similarly, negative
traits like selfish, angry, or corrupt subtract from the roll, making
him more likely to succumb. Often, his actions hurt, embarrass, or
offend comrades, employers, or other important people, and might have
social repercussions. On a botch, he'll get into real trouble --- it
could result in someone being seriously hurt or killed, in valuables
being broken or in him failing in his duty at a critical time.

For magi, this Flaw should not involve flashbacks to Twilight episodes,
spell botches or laboratory disasters. Since most of these situations
won't get worse by applying a penalty to the rest of the scene, it won't
be enough of a Flaw. But magi can be affected by combat, house fires, or
cave-ins just as much as other character types.

**Flawed Parma Magica**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your Parma Magica is defective and provides only half the normal Magic
Resistance against a certain Form. You may purchase this Flaw more than
once for different Forms.

**Flawed Powers**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character must have at least one Major Supernatural Virtue to take
this Flaw. The character's supernatural powers are limited or restricted
in some fashion. She suffers the effects of a Major Hermetic Flaw
(commonly Restriction or Necessary Condition), but it is applied to her
Supernatural Virtues rather than to her Hermetic magic (if any). Any
Flaw that is only appropriate to Hermetic Magic (for example, Deficient
Technique or Unstructured Caster) cannot be taken with this Flaw. Note
that the restriction on the supernatural power is not a separate Major
Flaw: this Minor Flaw represents the fact that a Major Supernatural
Virtue is less central to a character's activities than Hermetic magic
is to a magus.

**Fluctuating Fortune**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character's finances rise and fall like the tide, regardless of how
successful he is or what preventative measures he takes. He is
considered to have the Wealthy Virtue one year, followed by the Poor
Flaw the next. Besides monetary concerns, this means that the character
will have to only work one season in one year, followed by a year in
which he has to work three, all to maintain his livelihood. This cycle
of feast and famine continues throughout the character's life, always in
opposition to his financial desires. When he needs money most, he has
none, and has an abundance of funds when they are superfluous.

**Follower**

*Minor, Personality*

The character is a follower, not a leader. He rarely takes the
initiative, but is usually happy to follow the direction of a forthright
and decisive person. If he finds a leader, he tends to stick with her.

**Folk Magic**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character is capable of performing very minor acts of magic through
his knowledge of scraps of occult lore. Choose one (Realm) Lore that is
the key Ability for this magic; he may learn this Ability at Character
Creation even if he is normally unable to take Arcane Abilities. The
choice of (Realm) Lore also determines which supernatural realm his
magic is aligned to for the purposes of aura modifiers. He can only
create spells in one narrow area, which must be one of the following
four options:

**Abjuration:** Creates a ward against animals or supernatural
creatures. Uses the Rego Animal or Rego Vim guidelines.

**Divination:** Acquire magical senses that detect health, wealth, and
mental state. Uses Intellego Corpus, Intellego Mentem, and Intellego
Terram guidelines.

**Healing:** Grants a Recovery bonus for either wounds or diseases, and
aids the birthing of children and livestock. Uses the Creo Corpus or
Creo Animal guidelines. Infernal Lore cannot be used to produce this
type of effect.

**Evil Eye:** Causes minor acts of mischief like pain, blight of crops,
hair loss, sneezing, and so forth. Uses the Perdo Corpus, Perdo Animal,
or Perdo Herbam guidelines. Divine Lore cannot be used to produce this
type of effect.

To cast a spell the character must expend a Fatigue level, whether the
spell succeeds or fails. He must also spend at least 15 minutes
preparing the spell, during which time he needs unbroken concentration
and access to his "magical" materials (while necessary, these materials
offer no benefit to the casting). The spell is designed exactly like a
Hermetic spell. The Casting Total is equal to (Stamina + (Realm) Lore +
Aura modifier + stress die) / 2. Penetration is calculated in the normal
fashion: Casting Total -- Spell Level + Penetration modifiers. You may
pick this Virtue more than once, to acquire expertise in a different
category of spells. Each time you choose this Virtue, you can align it
to the same Realm as before or pick a different one, although a
character cannot have access to both the Divine and Infernal Realms.

**Foreign Upbringing**

*Minor, Personality*

This Flaw is somewhat similar to Covenant Upbringing, but means that the
character is a foreigner and comes from a remote or isolated corner of
Mythic Europe. He appears and sounds nothing like the locals, has odd
customs, habits, and religion (although he need not be pagan), and is
quite confused by local society. However, he is not an Outsider, and has
been accepted --- for the most part. His Native Language is one foreign
to the saga, and he needs to learn another language in order to
communicate with the rest of the turb. The maximum scores at character
creation for locality-dependent Abilities like Language, Area Lore, or
Organization Lore, as well as some social Abilities, are half (round up)
that which his age normally allows.

**(Form) Monstrosity**

*Minor, Supernatural*

This Flaw is primarily intended for animal characters, but may be taken
for characters who are basically human with the approval of the troupe.
The character is a monstrosity with a monstrous feature, or mutation,
which corresponds to a magical Form. The feature may be beneficial in
limited circumstances, but generally gives the character no advantage
over its non-mutated peers.

Animals are not usually bothered by monsters --- the character still has
the correct scent, and behavior --- and a single monstrous bull might be
found happily living among a herd of otherwise normal cattle, for
example. People, on the other hand, are highly troubled by the
appearance of monstrosities, which they invariably attribute to malign
influence; obviously monstrous animals are usually killed by peasants.
Often, 1 pawn of Muto vis may be extracted from the corpse of a
monstrous character, found concentrated in the monstrous feature.

Some examples of possible monstrosities are listed below, but the troupe
may devise their own, as required:

**Form Monstrosity\
Animal** an additional head

**Aquam** gills, or webbing on land animals

**Auram** wings on a land or sea animal

**Corpus** human-like limbs or eyes

**Herbam** a branch for a tail

**Ignem** fiery breath, or an extremely elevated body temperature

**Imaginem** unnatural hide (tiger fur on a horse, for example)

**Mentem** sensitivity to spirits (animal can both sense and is afraid
of spirits)

**Terram** teeth or claws of stone

**Vim** sensitive to magic (animal feels pain when in a magical aura)

**Fragile Constitution**

*Minor, General*

You are sickly and weak. You suffer a --3 penalty on all rolls to
recover from wounds and diseases.

**Frail**

*Minor, General*

The character is weak of build and easily hurt when undertaking physical
activities. He has a --3 penalty to his Soak score.

**Fury**

*Major, Story*

A violent temper sometimes overwhelms you, sending you into a
destructive, uncontrollable rage. You are likely to be provoked by some
sort of specific event, such as being insulted, being hurt, or hearing
the Order of Hermes disparaged. Roll 9+ on a stress die to avoid flying
into a rage when such an event occurs, with another roll every round to
try to calm yourself should you fail the first. On a botch, you try to
kill everyone around you. While enraged you get +3 to Damage, but --1 on
all other scores and rolls.

**Gabai**

*Minor, Social Status*

Appointed by the community council, the gabai is the local tax
collector. It is his responsibility to ensure that Jewish taxes, payable
to the community on such things as wine and meat, are collected from all
adult males.

The gabai has a --2 negative Reputation of "Tax Collector" in his
community. This Flaw is compatible with any other Free Social Status
Virtue.

**Gender Nonconforming**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You do not conform to the expected behavior for a person of the gender
that your society would assign to you in the absence of social cues such
as clothes and behavior. This may mean, for example, that you dress as a
member of another gender, or that you structure your life in a way
considered appropriate to another gender, or that you are sexually
attracted to members of the same gender. It does not necessarily mean
that you disagree about what your gender is, although it may. As a Minor
Flaw, it does not normally cause you problems, whether because your
society accepts your behavior, or because you can turn people who object
into newts, or for some other reason. As a Major Flaw, it does cause you
problems.

**Generous**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You willingly give away your property to anyone who expresses a desire
for it, even if they are not particularly deserving. If something is
very important, you might not give it to someone, but you will certainly
share it.

**Greater Malediction**

*Major, Supernatural*

You have been cursed by some supernatural power, in a way that greatly
hinders you. The effects of the curse should be comparable to those of
other Major Flaws. Indeed, almost any Flaw could be the result of a
curse.

**Greedy**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You like to eat and drink, and do so to excess whenever given the
chance. You are probably fat, but may not be if you rarely have the
chance to indulge.

**Grudge**

*Minor, Personality*

For some reason, based on a past event, the character holds a strong
grudge against someone who is part of his normal social circles, and
with whom he would be expected to have cordial relations. He is
constantly interested in what the other person is doing, what they are
working on, and how he can outdo them.

**Gullible**

*Minor, General*

There is one born every minute --- and it is this character! He is an
easy victim of ruses, stories and teasing lies. People lying to him get
a bonus to their Guile rolls of +1 to +3. Depending on how bright or
sharp-witted he is, he might not fall for obvious lies, denials of
things that are evident or common knowledge. However, he most likely
falls for lies that are even remotely plausible, and if he has no idea
whether or not something is true, he is almost certain to believe it.
This could, for instance, be whether or not there are mischievous
faeries under the bridge. If you really want the character to not fall
for something, make an Intelligence + Folk Ken Stress roll against an
Ease Factor equal to the Communication + Guile roll of the person
telling the tall tale. Recommended modifiers to the Ease Factor are +0
for obvious lies (ones that someone without the Flaw would certainly not
believe), +6 for outlandish tales and +9 for things which could be true,
or lies told by someone in authority, or who has expert knowledge of the
subject at hand.

**Hallucinations**

*Minor, General*

The character is afflicted by vivid hallucinations which seem to be true
visions, but rather than coming from a higher power, they are figments
of her imagination and fantasy. She finds these visions particularly
troublesome, and seeks meaning in them where there is none to be had.
Coincidence might mean that some part of her hallucinations comes to
pass, which only furthers her belief that there is meaning within them.
If the character also has the Visions Flaw, then some of her visions are
true, but most of them are meaningless jumbles of nonsense generated
from within her mind.

**Harmless Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

The character's Perdo spells cannot permanently destroy anything; they
temporarily disrupt the target, like Perdo Imaginem magic, but as soon
as the duration has passed the target returns to its natural state as if
nothing had happened, like a Muto effect. This means that a version of
*The Wound that Weeps* (PeCo15), for example, briefly causes a painful,
bleeding wound that immediately closes again. Likewise, *Fist of
Shattering* (PeTe10) causes an object of stone or weaker material to
briefly break apart, but then fuse itself together again. The
character's Ritual Perdo spells function normally, however.

This weakness can be a boon to a crafty character. A maga might invent a
spell to destroy a heavy rock at Concentration Duration; she could then
cast it and lie in wait. When her enemy walks into the vacant space, she
could release her concentration and crush her victim beneath it when it
reforms. However, in most cases this limitation is a minor hindrance, as
useful Perdo magic requires longer Durations.

**Hatred**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You hate someone or some group so much that hurting them dominates your
life. The target of your hatred must not be someone you could easily
overcome.

**Hedge Wizard**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Because of your esoteric magic, other magi distrust you, and more
importantly, grant you no respect. You start with a negative Reputation
within the Order of Hermes at level 3 as a hedge wizard, even though you
are a member of the Order.

**Heir**

*Minor, Story*

You have little power or wealth now, but you stand to inherit land and
possibly money. You need do nothing special to remain in your position,
but others may occasionally attempt to remove you from the line of
succession --- one way or another. When you finally win your inheritance
you gain its responsibilities as well, so your freedom may be
restricted.

**Hermetic Patron**

*Minor, Story*

You must be a Redcap or magus to take this Flaw.

You are watched over by an older magus or a more established Redcap, who
considers you his charge and helps you out from time to time. This
patron must be an NPC. Because of your special relationship, he is
willing to do additional favors for you that cost him little, such as
casting spells on you, lending you magic items, allowing you access to
his books, providing you with mundane materials, supporting you
financially for a season or two, or even adopting you into his House.
However, in return he will expect special attention from you, and may
periodically send you on missions or assign you important tasks.

You may take this Flaw with a large group of magi as your patrons,
though the more numerous your benefactors, the more you will be expected
to do for them.

**Higher Purpose**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

Let others concern themselves with petty matters, you have a nobler
goal. This purpose should be altruistic, like freeing an oppressed
people or bringing peace between the Order of Hermes and society.

**Hobbled**

*Minor, General*

Both of the character's legs are severely damaged. She may not walk
unless assisted by crutches or other devices, with which she can only
move a mere half mile per hour. Any roll that requires moving quickly is
penalized by --9. Her Dodge and other combat rolls are penalized by --6,
and you roll double the normal botch dice in combat situations.

**Horrifying Appearance -- Snake Legs**

*Major, Supernatural*

You have no legs, and instead your hips give rise to two or more
snake-like tails; you should consider how you survived childhood with
this horrific deformity. Your movement is not hindered under most
circumstances. You can hide this deformity under clothing, but you
cannot move without revealing it, leaving you feigning being crippled as
well.

**Humble**

*Minor, Personality*

You are humble, always willing to believe that others are more skilled
and better than you. You do not necessarily underestimate your own
abilities, you just think others are better.

**Hunchback**

*Minor, General*

You have a deformed body that gives you a grotesque appearance and
hinders your movements. You are at --3 to all rolls involving agility
and balance. Communication rolls that involve good looks are at --3.

**Hunger for (Form) Magic**

*Major, Supernatural*

The character has been repeatedly exposed to magic and has thus become
dependent upon magic to survive. The character must consume 1 pawn of
vis each season, corresponding to the Form that it has been mostly
exposed to. If the character is unable to consume a pawn of vis in a
season, it loses a Long-Term Fatigue Level that cannot be regained until
a pawn of the appropriate vis is consumed. For example, a character that
has Hunger for Ignem Magic and has not consumed a pawn of Ignem vis for
a whole year will have lost 4 Long-Term Fatigue Levels, and so be Dazed
with a --5 penalty to activities. If the character then consumes 1 pawn
of Ignem vis, it will regain a Fatigue Level and become Tired after an
hour has elapsed.

**Imagined Folk Tradition Vulnerability**

*Minor, Personality*

Although this flaw closely resembles a Delusion, Imagined Folk Tradition
Vulnerability has other game mechanical effects as well. This character
utterly and sincerely believes that he has been touched by the fay, and
that they have granted him his special skills --- whether or not any
such exist. So, naturally, he is convinced that he is as vulnerable to
traditional wards and folk magic as the fey. Whenever there is talk
about such folk remedies, or people around him try to perform them, he
does his best to dissuade them. If he can get away with it, he removes
or sabotage such wards; for instance, he sneaks around at night and
removes any warding marks or materials at doorways. Finally, he exhibits
strange behavior around active wards or ritualistic actions. This could
be refusing to shake hands with a person right after they have drawn the
sign of the cross, or flinching whenever salt is flung over someone's
shoulder. On the plus side, this Flaw allows the character to purchase a
score of 1 (but no more) in Faerie Lore at character creation. This is
because he needs a rudimentary knowledge of the fay and the wards
against them in order to be able to act this way. Without such
knowledge, his behavior is based on what he *thinks* such wards might
be.

**Impious Friend**

*Minor, Story, Tainted*

A minor demon poses as a friend of the character. The demon takes a
pleasant form but is usually invisible to anyone, other than its charge,
who lacks appropriate supernatural abilities. Many of these demons are
introduced to the tainted people they will defend and control during
infancy. They become childhood playmates.

The tainted person has not bargained for the services of the demon.
Instead, the character receives the services of his friend as part of
its master's plan to guide the character toward a tragic destiny. If the
demon feels the character's life is threatened, it may seek additional
assistance from its master. The tainted person believes the demon wishes
only the best for him. Many are ignorant of the demon's true shape.

**Incompatible Arts**

*Minor, Hermetic*

For some reason you are completely unable to use two combinations of
Techniques and Forms. For example, you may be unable to use Intellego
Herbam and Intellego Animal. You may not use these Arts together even if
one or both are requisites. This Flaw may be taken repeatedly with
different combinations, but may not be combined with a Deficiency (see
page @@).

**Incomprehensible**

*Minor, General*

You are almost completely unable to convey the knowledge and
understanding that you have. Anyone trying to learn from you or from a
book you have written must halve their Advancement Total (or Lab Total,
if you are a magus and have written Lab Texts on some spells or
enchanted items). If you are a magus teaching spells, halve all
applicable Lab Totals, both yours and the student's.

**Inconstant Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

The character's magic is easily distracted, and it stutters and starts.
Spells that require his guidance (e.g. concentration, or aimed spells)
after being cast are not immediately responsive, as if the character
must focus the spell's attention, and spells that are triggered by a
condition (such as *Waiting Spells* or enchanted devices) take about two
minutes to activate, as if the magic had wandered off when the caster
was not watching it carefully. Any magic items he creates with constant
effects are interrupted at sunrise and sunset; the magic is not
seamless. The character suffers a --3 penalty to all Finesse rolls.

**Independent Craftsman**

*Minor, General*

This character has his own way of working and doesn't like other people
getting in his way. This character always treats his Leadership and
Craft or Profession Abilities as three levels lower when working with
others on a given task. For Craftsmen, this means that whether he is
working as an assistant or working with assistants his Craft Ability has
a penalty of --3. This affects the number of assistants he can employ in
the workshop and the benefit that he provides when working as an
assistant. If you are not using the rules in *City and Guild* (page 73),
treat this is a Personality Flaw.

**Indiscreet**

*Major, Story*

You are unable to keep a secret. You must tell all to the first
interested party you meet in an effort to be helpful or to demonstrate
that you are in-the-know, unless you succeed on an Intelligence-based
stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9. If you botch, you may have to
be physically restrained by your companions from answering any questions
put to you for the remainder of the encounter.

**Infamous**

*Minor, General*

People know you well and curse you in their prayers. You have a level 4
bad Reputation, specifying the horrible deeds that earned you such ill
will.

**Infamous Master**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your master was a diabolist, bumbler, fool, widely despised, or held in
contempt for some other reason. Most magi expect little better from you.
Even if you've done nothing wrong, you are treated as though you don't
deserve to be a member of the Order. You have a bad Reputation of the
appropriate type at level 3 among magi.

**Inscribed Shadow**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character's stigmata are reflected by glowing symbols in the
character's shadow. This causes alarm among non-magicians and makes the
character's stigmata extremely easy for other Criamon magi to read (+3
on all rolls). The shadow's glowing symbols do not vanish when there is
insufficient light to form a shadow --- they burn brighter. Characters
who use magic to hide their stigmata are not acting aptly. Only
characters with stigmata may have this Flaw, which normally means that
they must be magi of House Criamon.

**Jinxed**

*Minor, General*

The character is a magnet for any bad luck. He is not personally the
cause of the bad luck, and so need not roll any extra botch dice or
suffer any penalty to die rolls. However, whenever chance determines who
will be affected by misfortune, the odds are biased against him to be
the one affected. For example, if it has been determined that a rope
used for climbing will break, it is more likely to do so when the jinxed
character makes the climb. If determining when the bandits will attack
the camp at night, it is more likely to happen right at the moment when
the character is relieving himself. If the storyguide is rolling dice to
determine the target of a random event, a jinxed character should be
affected half of the time, and his comrades between them the other half.
His bad luck does not tend to spill over onto others; in fact, other
characters may prefer to keep him around to deflect any bad luck from
themselves.

**Judged Unfairly**

*Minor, General*

Somehow you come across the wrong way to people, and they universally
distrust and underestimate you. You catch no one's eye, impress no one,
and can get no one to take you seriously. If you ever find an
exceptional someone who sees you as you want to be seen, you will cling
to that person. You cannot gain a positive Reputation in any community,
and this Flaw is incompatible with any Virtue that gives you such a
Reputation.

**Lame**

*Minor, General*

One of your legs is weakened, whether since birth or through some
accident. You move slowly and clumsily. Your base speed is a mere one
mile per hour, and anyone can outrun you. You suffer a --6 penalty on
rolls involving moving quickly or with agility, --3 on Dodge, and --1 on
other combat scores.

**Lecherous**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You seek sexual contact with as many people as possible. Note that you
need not be any good at seduction; skill here merely changes the kinds
of problems you encounter.

**Leprosy**

*Major, General*

The character has leprosy. A leper has a permanent --2 modifier to her
Living Condition (with an additional --1 if she lives in a leper
colony), and whenever she undergoes an Aging Crisis (page @@) the leper
sustains a Heavy Wound in addition to any other result. Lepers cannot
gain a positive Reputation due to a pungent rotting smell that they
emit.

**Lesser Malediction**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You have been cursed by some supernatural power. The effects of the
curse should be about as bad as other Minor General Flaws.

**Limited Magic Resistance**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You are less able to resist magic than other magi. You gain no bonus
from one of your Form scores to Magic Resistance, though if you are
caught without your Parma Magica, you retain a Magic Resistance of 0.
You may take this Flaw multiple times, for multiple Forms.

**Lingering Injury**

*Minor, General*

The character suffers from an old injury that won't heal properly,
resulting in a --1 penalty to all rolls involving physical activity. If
he botches a physical action, he aggravates the injury and the penalty
becomes --3 (recovery from aggravation is as for a Light Wound). This
condition worsens with age, so multiply whatever the penalty is by 1 +
(Decrepitude Score).

**Loose Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your Advancement Total is halved whenever you try to Master spells.

**Lost Love**

*Minor, Personality*

You have lost your true love to death, distance, or marriage. You take
little joy in life's pleasures and give up easily in the face of
difficulty, since you've already lost the most important struggle. On
those occasions when you forget yourself and have a good time, you
inevitably feel sorrow afterwards, thinking about how it could have been
if your love were with you.

**Low Self-Esteem**

*Major, General*

You have a deflated opinion of your own self-worth. You begin the game
with no Confidence Score, and never have any Confidence Points.

**Low Tolerance**

*Minor, General*

The character cannot easily withstand pain and fatigue. Increase the
penalties for reduced Fatigue levels by one point, and increase the
total penalty from wounds the character has received by one point. You
also suffer a --3 penalty on rolls for the character to resist pain.

**Lycanthrope**

*Major, Supernatural*

You have been cursed to change form into a dangerous predator (such as a
wolf, lynx, or bear) on nights of the full moon (or similar, monthly,
astrological events). No items or clothing transform between shapes, and
it takes one full round for the full transformation to take effect. You
are not immune to normal weapons, and the curse does not infect bite
victims. The animal may be detected as a cursed human with an InAn or
InCo spell.

You have the intelligence of an animal while changed, react to all
stimuli as an animal, and do not retain any memory of actions taken in
animal form, save occasionally in dreams. You may not even realize that
you are under this curse. You can still recognize both friends and
enemies when changed.

Lycanthropes may transform into a non-magical animal between Size --1
(wolf) and Size +2 (bear). You have the normal physical characteristics
of a shapeshifter (see page @@), except that +3 is added to your Soak
score (in animal form only). Furthermore, you are fully healed of all
wounds incurred in animal form upon resuming human form (which happens
at dawn).

**Magic Addiction**

*Major, Hermetic*

You crave the rush of casting and holding power over magic. Whenever you
cast a spell, you have a difficult time stopping yourself from casting
again and again until you drop from exhaustion. Whenever you use a
stress die in spellcasting, you must, whether or not the spell succeeds,
make an Intelligence + Concentration stress roll, against an Ease Factor
of half the level of the spell (or, if you botched, the level you were
attempting). If you fail, as your next action you must either cast a
Formulaic spell of at least the same level as the previous spell, or
cast any spontaneous spell, expending Fatigue and not reserving levels
for Penetration. You must roll again to control your addiction, based on
the level of the spell you just cast, but you get a +3 bonus to the roll
for every spell you cast after the first. If you botch, you continue
casting spells until you fall unconscious.

**Magical Air**

*Major, General*

People and animals react to you as if you had The Gift. You may not take
this Flaw if you actually do have The Gift; see The Blatant Gift (page
@@) instead.

**Magical (Being) Companion**

*Minor, Story*

The character is accompanied by an intelligent magical being, one that
is smart enough to follow orders or disobey them on its own initiative,
which the character must regularly look after. This might be an animal,
a spirit, a human-like creature, or even an animate object. *Realms of
Power: Magic* contains extensive rules for designing such characters,
but they can also be made following the guidelines and examples in
Chapter 13 of this book. A grog-level character might be essentially an
extension of the character's will, while a companion-level character
might follow instructions but often do what it thinks is best, and a
magus-level character might be condescending or wild, and rarely act
except on its own initiative.

A particularly common example is a magical animal that's smart enough to
follow your orders or to disobey them on its own initiative. The smaller
and more innocuous the creature, the more intelligent it is. A ferret or
crow is as intelligent as a human, a wolf is very cunning, and an animal
the size of a horse is simply more intelligent than normal. The creature
has a Magic Might score of 10 -- Size.

**Magical Fascination**

*Minor, Personality*

This character is intensely interested in supernatural and magical
phenomena, to the exclusion of all other motivations. It is as if his
life is hollow and drab without these experiences. He will involve
himself in any supernatural investigation, social encounter, or
confrontation. He must try and find out as much as he can about it, and
he is curious and has busy hands, definitely trying to take souvenirs.
To represent the scraps of knowledge he has, he is allowed to have a
score of 1 (but no more) in either Magic or Faerie Lore at character
creation. But most of the time, he is filling in the blanks himself and
making it up as he goes along, enthusiastically.

**Manifest Sin**

*Minor, Supernatural*

A sin or crime this character has committed in the past stains his
spirit and is manifest to those who can perceive things hidden to mortal
senses. Characters with Second Sight, Sense Holiness & Unholiness, or
similar Supernatural Powers or Abilities perceive the sin through one or
more senses.

The manifestation of the sin or crime should be chosen by you and the
storyguide together, and should always be appropriate to the sin or
crime in question. For instance, the perpetrator of a violent crime may
appear to have blood on his hands, or be accompanied by the sobbing of
his victim, while lustful sins may be seen to play across the sinner's
leering face.

In addition, the character suffer a --1 penalty to all social
interaction rolls or totals as the intangible aura of their past sins
affects those with whom they interact.

While his spirit is tainted and the manifestation will always be with
him, he may spend a Faith Point, including Faith Points gained from
taking Holy Communion and from relics, to banish the manifestation for
Sun duration. While banished, the sin cannot be perceived and the social
penalty is also suspended.

This Flaw originates from either the Divine or the Infernal Realm, as a
mark of punishment, penitence, or temptation.

**Manufactured Ignorance**

*Minor, Story, Tainted*

The tainted person has a delusion, but his mistaken belief is sustained
by a group of minor demons that provide a stream of supporting evidence.
Different groups of demons create varying delusions for tainted people.
Many such people believe they have a glorious destiny, and the world
smiles at their efforts, because the demons make it appear so. Hermetic
demon hunters have found more than one child who believed he was the
final scion of a noble house.

In each story, the character receives one minor, fortunate occurrence
that confirms his rosy view of life. Minor fortunate occurrences are
situations demons can arrange surreptitiously ahead of time. They may
include a character arriving at an inn where the last room is available,
finding an important door unlocked, or a coal from the fireplace
mysteriously extinguishing itself on the floor rushes.

**Many Marriageable Daughters**

*Major, Story*

The character has a lot of daughters and needs to participate in stories
to marry them off suitably. In most sagas, this Flaw is most suitable
for characters of high social status, as their stories are more likely
to involve the covenant, and thus other characters.

**Master of None**

*Minor, General*

Either by choice or circumstance, this character never seems to be able
to stick at a task or job for longer than a season, usually following
the work as it moves through the year. As a result, this character can't
apply any experience points earned through an Advancement Total to an
Ability or Art that they have already applied experience points to this
year. Where they can't be applied to a different Ability or Art, the
experience points are lost.

Experience points gained through other means, such as Secondary Insight,
are unaffected and may be applied normally.

**Meddler**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You want to fix other peoples' lives: arrange matches, teach children to
sew "properly," or tend the sick. You waste a lot of time and energy on
such endeavors, and people usually resent it.

**Mentor**

*Minor, Story*

A person of some importance, wealth, or wisdom has taken an interest in
your life, and at times provides you with minor material aid and advice.
However, at some point your mentor will have a small favor or two to ask
of you. He might not necessarily like your relationship with the
covenant --- perhaps you must keep it a secret. The Mentor must be an
NPC.

**Missing Ear**

*Minor, General*

You cannot accurately locate the direction of sounds, and suffer a
penalty of --3 to hearing rolls.

**Missing Eye**

*Minor, General*

You cannot judge close distances easily and get --3 on Attack rolls for
missiles and targeting rolls for spells. In melee combat you suffer --1
on Attack rolls because your field of vision is limited. You also have a
blind side from which people can approach unseen. This Flaw can be
combined with Poor Eyesight, but the penalties are cumulative.

**Missing Hand**

*Minor, General*

Perhaps it was an accident or a punishment in your past that cost you
one of your hands. Climbing, combat, and other activities normally
requiring both hands are at a penalty of --3 or greater.

**Mistaken Identity**

*Major, Story*

Someone, who looks exactly like you and whom you and your companions
will most likely never meet, lives near you, and is responsible for an
ongoing variety of violent, illegal, obscene, or embarrassing acts. You
often have to explain who you are, and sometimes have to deal with the
consequences of the other person's acts.

**Monastic Vows**

*Major, Story*

You have taken vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience to a religious
superior. This covers the vows taken by mendicant friars, as well as
those taken by monks and nuns strictly speaking.

**Monastic Vows (Hermetic)**

*Major, Hermetic*

You have taken vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience to a religious
superior, which means that you cannot own vis and must only possess
functional magic devices. You cannot marry, and many magi might
interpret that as prohibiting binding a familiar. You must do what your
master commands in service of your order, though in return you can
expect aid and assistance when needed.

**Monstrous Blood**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character's essential nature has been changed through exposure to
the Magic realm, often because of a relationship to a magic being, which
gives her true form unfortunate supernatural properties. This changes
the character's appearance enough that others can immediately recognize
that there is something wrong about her, and people might say that she
has tainted blood. The character is more resistant to age and receives a
--1 bonus to all Aging rolls, and may learn Magic Lore during character
creation.

However, the character also gains a minor physical deformity appropriate
to the Magic being type that is associated with the character's
background. Some examples are below, or you can make up your own.

**Magic Animal:** The character has a physical feature normally
associated with animals, such as wings, scales, gills, sharp teeth, or
claws. These are not usable by the character, and give a --3 penalty to
appropriate activities (such as running or climbing) as these
deformities get in the way.

**Magic Human:** The character must decrease one of his Characteristics
by 1, but not below --3. This might be Strength or Stamina to represent
weakened blood, or Presence to indicate a dowdy appearance. The
character also has a poor Reputation of level 3 among other magic
beings.

**Magic Spirit:** The character has a mental block against many
activities that are not supernatural, possibly due to a noticeable
difficulty with retaining memories. Subtract 3 from all of the
character's Intelligence and Perception rolls that do not involve a
Supernatural Ability or Art.

**Magic Thing:** The character has a constant Lesser Power that is
mostly detrimental to it in some way, such as a ward that prevents it
from picking up wooden objects, or that causes books it touches to burst
into flame. The effect normally occurs involuntarily, but the character
can spend a Confidence Point to prevent it from triggering.

**Motion Sickness**

*Minor, General*

Riding a horse, in a cart, or sailing on a ship makes you violently ill.
When not traveling on foot, you suffer double the fatigue loss on long
journeys, with a minimum loss of two Fatigue levels. Violent jostling
over a period of a few hours could conceivably lead to unconsciousness.

**Mute**

*Major, General*

You cannot speak; perhaps your tongue was cut out. You probably use
rudimentary hand gestures and grunts to communicate your needs. You can
still understand languages perfectly well, and may learn to read and
write if you have an appropriate Virtue. Note that magi with this Flaw
get a --10 penalty to all spellcasting, although this may be offset by
taking the Quiet Magic Virtue (page @@). A magus with this Flaw can be
assumed to be able to make sounds, which are sufficient to allow normal
use of the Voice Range.

**Necessary Condition**

*Major, Hermetic*

In order for your magic to work, you must perform a specific action
while casting any spell. This should be something simple, such as
singing or spinning around three times. If you cannot perform the
action, you cannot cast spells at all.

**Necessary (Realm) Aura for (Ability)**

*Minor, Supernatural*

Due to some connection with a given supernatural realm, the absence of a
given supernatural aura has a pronounced effect upon the character's
ability to focus on certain tasks. The character has a --3 penalty to
any totals he generates with a particular Ability when not in the right
aura. A character may take this Flaw once for any particular Ability.
The chosen Ability should be one which the character is likely to use
frequently, such as in service to the covenant or to support his
day-to-day activities.

When applied to Craft or Profession Abilities, this Flaw also reduces
the character's capability to support himself by reducing the number of
Labor Points (as described in *City & Guild)* he accumulates each season
when not working within the appropriate aura.

Troupes should think carefully about how a character would be limited by
taking Magic (which covers most covenants) or Dominion (which covers
most other human settlements) aura. If the character would not be
limited, the Flaw should not be allowed.

**Night Terrors**

*Minor, General*

This character is plagued far too often by horrible nightmares and fits
of screaming in his sleep. The character must make a Stress Roll against
an Ease Factor of 9 in order to avoid suffering terrors. The storyguide
may call for modifiers of --1 to --3 if he has faced eerie or terrifying
events recently, like meeting a demon or battling the undead.

Suffering from terrors means that the character wakes up often and in a
panic during the night. Situations might occur where he overreacts or
reacts in unfortunate ways, if forced awake during such nights. The
morning leaves him with a Long Term Fatigue Level lost. These Long Term
Fatigue Levels are cumulative, so several bad nights leave him in bad
shape. Subtract the character's Fatigue penalty from the Ease Factor to
avoid night terrors, to represent how a truly exhausted victim will at
some point sleep through the nightmares due to sheer exhaustion. If a
night of terrors renders the character Unconscious, he slips into deep,
dreamless sleep. He sleeps for an entire day and night, and wakes up at
Winded, ending the string of Night Terrors. A character with this Flaw
may not also take the Sleep Disorder Flaw

This Flaw normally makes seasonal Laboratory work impossible, and so is
not suitable for magi.

**No Hands**

*Major, General*

You have no hands. Any activity requiring hands is impossible, and magi
with this Flaw take a --5 penalty to all Casting Scores. This may be
offset by taking the Subtle Magic Virtue (page @@) or the Still Casting
Spell Mastery ability.

**No Sense of Direction**

*Minor, General*

You are completely unable to follow directions. North, south, east, and
west have no meaning to you, and you often confuse right and left. You
frequently get lost while traveling unfamiliar paths by yourself, or
with others following your lead, and often have to reason your way home
or to your destination from first principles. This Flaw is incompatible
with the Well-Traveled Virtue.

**Nocturnal**

*Minor, General*

Your natural body rhythms try to keep you sleeping until noon. You are
at --1 on all rolls made between dawn and midday. Conversely, you have
little difficulty staying up at night. Though you enjoy no special
benefits in the dark, your companions may decide to saddle you with
night guard duty on a regular basis to use your attributes to best
effect.

**Noncombatant**

*Minor, Personality*

You have no interest in combat, nor do you have any ability with it. You
might be unreasonably afraid of combat, or a complete pacifist, or prone
to freezing and doing nothing.

**Oath of Fealty**

*Major, Story*

You have sworn an oath of loyalty and support to someone outside the
covenant, and sometimes they call on you to uphold your vow. Magi are
forbidden from taking Oaths of Fealty by the Hermetic Code. Some don't
let that stop them.

**Obese**

*Minor, General*

You are large because of fat, not muscle. You are at --1 to all rolls
that involve moving quickly or gracefully and at --3 to all Fatigue
rolls. You are not so large that your Size is increased, and you may
take this Flaw along with the Virtues and Flaws that change your Size.

**Obsessed**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You are fixated on some prized object, action, or ideal. This interferes
with your accomplishment of more immediate tasks. Examples might include
obsessive protection of magi to the point that you attack those who
insult them, or obsessive neatness where you keep yourself spotless and
deride those who do not.

**Offensive to (Beings)**

*Minor, Hermetic and General*

This Flaw is associated with one of six classes of beings: animals,
mundane humans, divine beings, faeries, demons, or magical creatures.
These last four include characters associated with the Divine, Faerie,
Infernal, or Magic realm, respectively, through Supernatural Virtues or
Flaws, as well as beings with Might.

Beings of the chosen category react badly to the character, as if he had
The Gift, which makes them very uncomfortable around him and gives him a
--3 to all social interaction rolls with them.

You may not take this Flaw more than once; characters who are Offensive
to more than one kind of being should take Magical Air instead.
Characters with The Gift may take this Flaw only if they have the Gentle
Gift, which makes this type of being react to them negatively while
others are unaffected. Characters with Magical Air may not take it at
all.

If you are offensive to animals, animals with a Might score react in
different ways. In general, those that react negatively to The Gift
react negatively to you, while those that react positively do not,
unless you actually have The Gift.

**Optimistic**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You are convinced that everything will turn out for the best. This is
not overconfidence, as you accept that you might well fail. Even if you
do, however, you are sure that circumstances will mean that everything
works to your benefit.

**Outcast**

*Minor, Social Status*

You have the rough task of making it on your own-normal society rejects
you and you are not attached to a covenant. Perhaps you have a magical
nature, a supernatural background, some disfigurement, or a tremendous
scandal in your past. You may not take the Wealthy Virtue.

**Outlaw**

*Major, Social Status*

You have been outlawed, and must live by your wits outside society. You
may take Martial Abilities at character generation, and have a
Reputation at level 2 for whatever got you outlawed. Outlaw followers
created as grogs should take the Branded Criminal, Outcast or Wanderer
social status.

**Outlaw Leader**

*Minor, Social Status*

You command a small group (three to six persons) of outlaws. Your
followers look up to you and do what you tell them --- within reason.
However, you must occasionally stick up for the group or one of its
members, as well as provide for them. You often have to deal with
challenges to your leadership in one form or another. You are well known
as an outlaw in the local area, with a Reputation level of 3. You are
actively sought by the local lord, sheriff, or other such official. You
may take Martial Abilities at character generation. Grogs may not take
this Flaw.

**Outsider**

*Minor or Major, Social Status*

You belong to a group that is both readily identifiable and distrusted
or disliked. Examples in most of Europe include Jews, North Africans,
and Arabs. For sagas set in Egypt, this Flaw is appropriate for
Europeans.

If you live in society, take the Major version. You are shunned and
often persecuted because of this, and your life and freedom may
occasionally be in peril. You have a bad Reputation of level 1 to 3
(depending upon how easy it is to identify you) among members of the
dominant social group of your area.

If you spend most of your life in a closed group, such as a city ghetto
or covenant, where people like you are accepted, take the Minor version,
as you are only shunned if you leave your home, and have somewhere
relatively safe to run to if you find trouble. You still have the bad
Reputation among members of the dominant social group, but do not meet
them so often.

As a general rule, companions should take the Major version of this
Social Status, as they probably interact with wider society often enough
for it to be a major problem. Grogs may take the Minor version.

If the saga takes the character to an area where they are a member of
the dominant culture (an Egyptian who lives in a covenant in Ireland
travels to Egypt, for example), the troupe should decide on a suitable
Social Status for the character. This should normally be a Free Social
Status Virtue, unless there are established facts in the character's
background that suggest a different choice.

**Overconfident**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You have a completely unshakable faith in your own abilities. You
believe that you will always perform at, or slightly above, the peak of
your abilities, and cannot imagine failure. If you actually botch, you
come up with some rationalization as to what \'really\' happened.

**Oversensitive**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

Something that others find merely unpleasant you consider intolerable.
Examples might include an oversensitivity to disrespect, to
slovenliness, or to impiety. If you are the violent type, you may start
fights with those who offend you.

**Pagan**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You do not follow the teachings of the Church, and have never been
baptized. This tends to upset those in authority in Mythic Europe and
frighten common people who learn of it. You do not observe Christian
holidays, and you try to avoid churchmen and the Dominion. You cannot
pretend to go along with society, however, because you believe that it
would displease your gods and incur their wrath --- you might suffer
grave supernatural consequences if you take Communion or appear to
worship gods other than your own. You may begin with Magic Lore or
Faerie Lore, depending on the specifics of your faith. (This is not a
Flaw in areas of Mythic Europe with substantial pagan populations, but
by 1220 the only such areas are in parts of the Novgorod Tribunal. It
may also be a Minor Flaw for grogs who live at a covenant with a
substantial pagan population that is an accepted and open part of the
covenant community.)

**Painful Magic**

*Major, Hermetic*

Casting spells causes you to suffer the equivalent of one Fatigue level
in pain for each spell you cast. This reduces all your actions by the
appropriate Fatigue penalty, which is cumulative with any from actual
fatigue or injuries (though you do not suffer any physical damage from
pain). You recover these \"pain levels\" just like Fatigue levels.

**Palsied Hands**

*Minor, General*

Your hands shake uncontrollably, which makes casting spells or holding
objects difficult. All rolls involving holding or wielding an object are
made at --2, including weapon skills. Magi and others who rely on hand
gestures to work magic must roll an extra botch die when casting a
spell.

**Pessimistic**

*Minor, Personality*

You always expect the worst. You may try to enjoy yourself, but you are
sure that anything that can go wrong, will, and will pick on you.

**Pious**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You are a fervent follower of your religion. You avoid the things it
prohibits, and enthusiastically do the things it commands.

**Plagued by Supernatural Entity**

*Major, Story*

Some supernatural being interferes in your life on a fairly regular
basis. It may even have your best interests at heart, but the result is
that you get dragged into stories. Suitable examples would be a demon
trying to corrupt you, an angel trying to save you, a faerie playing
games with you, or a ghost continuing the agenda she had while alive.

**Poor**

*Major, General*

You are a poor member of your social class. You must work three seasons
per year in order to make ends meet, and can afford only the necessities
of life, as measured by your status. This also means that you have one
fewer season available for any form of advancement other than exposure,
which is a major hindrance. You cannot take this Flaw if you are
supported by the covenant. In particular, this Flaw is not available to
magi.

**Poor (Characteristic)**

*Minor, General*

You have an exceedingly bad Characteristic --- lower one which is
already --3 or lower by one point. Describe what it is about you that
makes this obvious, such as a feeble stature, hideous visage, or
slack-jawed stupidity. You may take this Flaw twice for a single
Characteristic, lowering it to --5, and multiple times for different
Characteristics.

**Poor Concentration**

*Minor, General*

While the character may have a mind that is quick to make decisions, he
has a short attention span. The character has a --3 penalty to
Concentration rolls.

**Poor Eyesight**

*Minor, General*

Bleary vision impedes your performance. Rolls involving sight, including
rolls to attack and defend, are at --3. New environments are
disorienting and perhaps frightening for you. This Flaw can be combined
with Missing Eye (above), but the penalties are cumulative.

**Poor Formulaic Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You are simply not very good at formulaic magic. Subtract 5 from every
roll that you make to cast formulaic spells. This does not apply to
Ritual spells.

**Poor Hearing**

*Minor, General*

Subtract 3 from rolls involving hearing. Speech that is hard for others
to understand because of language, dialect, or accent is almost
impossible for you to follow. You often pretend to be listening to
people when in fact you are not.

**Poor Living Conditions**

*Minor, General*

Either because of this character's own poor living conditions, or those
of people he is in frequent contact with, he is more susceptible to the
rigors of daily life. The character has an additional --1 Living
Conditions Modifier. This is cumulative with the character's base Living
Conditions Modifier.

**Poor Memory**

*Minor, Personality*

You have a very hard time recalling one type of thing, such as names,
faces, or places.

**Poor Student**

*Minor, General*

You are bad at learning new things. Subtract 3 from all Advancement
Totals derived from teaching and books (that is, you have no penalty to
adventure experience, exposure, practice, studying from vis, or
training), but do not reduce a total below one. If you could learn
something without this Flaw, you still learn a bit.

**Primitive Equipment**

*Minor, General*

The character is capable of using only the simplest tools and equipment.
Perhaps her training was incomplete, or she has been affected by some
sort of curse, or maybe she originates from a less
technologically-capable society and refuses to adapt. She is restricted
to Inexpensive weapons and armor only, regardless of what is made
available to her. If forced by order or necessity to use other
equipment, her Burden is one point higher when she uses anything other
than Inexpensive weapons, and one point higher when she uses anything
other than Inexpensive armor. She suffers a --1 penalty to Attack and
Defense if using inappropriate weapons, and a --1 penalty to Initiative
and Protection if using inappropriate armor. If the character works as a
laborer or craftsman, she uses simple tools and primitive procedures.
Unless working with simple tasks, the base Craft Value (see *City &
Guild*, page 67) is raised by 1--3 at the storyguide's discretion, based
on complexity. Further, her workshop may not be improved with regards to
Innovation (*City & Guild*, page 65). Other Profession Abilities
dependent on tools and equipment suffer a similar penalty for complex
tasks. You should only take this Flaw if the character belongs to a
profession that relies heavily on equipment, such as a smith, mason, or
soldier.

**Primogeniture Lineage**

*Minor, Story and Hermetic*

The character is in line for Primus of House Verditius. Either her
parens, or her parens's parens, is the Primus, and she is one of his
descendants. She is at least three places removed from the Primus. She
receives undue attention from the House, as they eye her as a
prospective Primus. The other magi in the same line may also regard her
poorly, hoping to somehow remove her from her heritage. Her ascension to
Primus is far from guaranteed, and many events may transpire to prevent
her from claiming the title. This should foster very political stories
for her. This Flaw can only be taken by magi of House Verditius, as a
maga who has left the House is no longer a candidate for Primus. In her
case, it would be no more than an interesting feature of her background.

**Prohibition**

*Minor, Supernatural*

You have had a Conditional Curse (also known as a \"Geas\") cast upon
you and must obey the restrictions of your prohibition or be penalized
by the curse. If you fail to adhere to the restrictions, you will suffer
the curse in full force. The troupe must agree on both the restriction,
and the curse that strikes you if you break it.

**Proud**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You believe that you are more important than just about everybody, and
expect the appropriate respect. Magi may admit one or two equals, but do
not believe that they have any superiors. Mundanes will admit social
superiors, but still believe themselves to be fundamentally better than,
say, the king.

**Raised from the Dead**

*Major, Story, Supernatural*

You died, and were brought back to life through a holy miracle. You
begin with at least three Warping points, plus one Warping point for
every year that has passed since you were resurrected, and you
automatically receive another Warping point every year you continue
living. You also have a level 4 reputation in the area where the miracle
occurred. You do not remember what happened to you while you were dead,
although you may have virtuous impulses that you cannot explain.

**Raised in the Gutter**

*Minor, General*

This character was raised on the margins of society. She is able to use
her social abilities normally with those of the lower and middle
classes, but doesn't know how to act among her "betters." When using
Charm or Guile, it is obvious that she's from the bad part of town, and
this makes convincing people to do what she wants harder (--3 on rolls).
She can use Etiquette normally if she's holding her social place (which
means staying silent and doing exactly what she's told) but suffers a
--3 penalty if she tries to go beyond this.

**(Realm) Stigmatic**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character occasionally manifests physical phenomena in the presence
of supernatural powers. Pick one of the four Realms of Power; whenever
he enters an aura of strength 4 or more aligned to that realm, or is
affected by a power greater than fourth magnitude (20th level) from that
realm, he suffers from the stigmata. Every individual suffers from
stigmata differently, but the most common variants are dark marks
appearing on the skin, blood issuing from orifices, spontaneous eruption
of wounds, minor twisting of the limbs, or the acquisition of minor
animal features. Whenever they manifest, the character loses a Long-Term
Fatigue level that he cannot recover while he remains under the
influence of that Realm. When he recovers the Fatigue level, the
stigmata fade. If he ever takes a Warping point from exposure to his
sensitive Realm, his stigmata erupt so violently that he takes a Light
Wound as well as Fatigue, and the stigmata remain until he recovers from
this wound.

**Rebellious**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You react adversely to any attempt to impose authority over you, and
work against those who are in command. You do not necessarily have any
desire to be a leader yourself, but you don't like to be pushed around.

**Reckless**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You tend not to notice that situations are threatening, and certainly do
not stop to consider whether they might be. You just go ahead and charge
right in.

**Reclusive**

*Minor, Personality*

You do not like being disturbed or interrupted. You feel that an
intrusion by another upon your time is unnecessary at best, and an
insult at worst. You are very reluctant to be dragged into public
places, or group activities, and generally complain when you must
participate. Note that this is often a bad Flaw for a player character,
unless there is a good reason why that character needs to stay out of
play most of the time (for example, he is played by the alpha
storyguide).

**Rector/Proctor**

*Major, Story*

The character is the representative leader of his faculty or nation at a
university, depending on whether he is a master or a student. He is
responsible for his colleagues' behavior and is obliged to deal with
their academic concerns. The character must have a Social Status Virtue
dictating his place within the university. The character can expect to
spend considerable time sorting out his fellows' affairs.

**Regular**

*Minor, General*

The character lives according to a strict religious rule, which leaves
little time for other activities. The character must spend one of his
free seasons on the seasonal activity of worship. This is particularly
suitable for monk and canon characters, but it is not compulsory. The
Regular Flaw is compatible with Wealthy and Poor, but a Poor Regular
character effectively has no free seasons and may be unsuitable as a
player character. Magi can be Regular.

**Repellent**

*Major, General, Tainted*

The character has developed one of the physical characteristics of his
demonic creator, which causes fear and revulsion among normal humans.
The character makes all rolls requiring trust with a --6 penalty. The
character also gains a minor advantage from the repellent feature. As
examples, a character with horns, claws, or fangs could learn to use
them in melee, a scaled character might have a Soak bonus of +3, and a
character with demonic eyes might see in the dark.

**Restricted Learning**

*Minor, General*

The character is incapable of learning new things without assistance.
Pick five Abilities at character creation; you can only apply experience
points to these Abilities. The character cannot learn any new Abilities
on her own; she must receive experience points from Teaching or Training
to develop a new Ability or to improve one that is not part of the
initial five. Furthermore, she cannot use an Ability with no score, even
if it can normally be used untrained. Any Supernatural Abilities from
Virtues she possesses are added to the list of Abilities to which she
can apply experience points. All mundane animals are required to take
this Flaw. A character with Intelligence rather than Cunning is not a
mundane animal for these purposes.

**Restricted Power**

*Minor, Supernatural*

This Flaw limits the use of a supernatural power that can normally be
used at will, such as those granted by the Focus Power, Greater Power,
Lesser Power, Personal Power, and Ritual Power Virtues. The character
must perform some special ceremony to activate it, such as drawing
symbols on the ground or gesturing and chanting like a magus, or else
the power only functions on a limited class of targets (such as men,
wolves, sounds, or sand) or in specific circumstances (like at night,
under water, when touching iron, or after singing a song). This Flaw may
be taken once for each power the character possesses.

**Restriction**

*Major, Hermetic*

You cannot cast spells at all under certain uncommon conditions. These
might refer to your state, such as touching the earth directly or having
no beard, or to the target, such as birds or glass, or to your location
when you use the magic, such as on a small boat or in a storm. The
Restriction also applies to effects generated by any enchanted items you
create. Spells cast remain in effect even if the Restriction comes into
play. Thus, if your Restriction is that you must not have a beard, you
cast a spell with Year duration, and then grow a beard, the spell does
not fail.

**Rigid Magic**

*Major, Hermetic*

You cannot use vis when you cast spells. Thus, you cannot increase your
spell rolls or cast Ritual magic. You can use vis in the laboratory, or
to refresh a Longevity Ritual.

**Rolling Stone**

*Minor, General*

The rolling stone gathers no moss, and neither does this character. She
has moved from village to village so often that she finds it difficult
to create attachments in the community. All social rolls have a --1
penalty within the community.

**Savantism**

*Minor, General*

The character's family was cursed by faeries; his mother tripped over a
hare while pregnant with him; or he was born on horseback. He is
physically capable, but simple-minded and slow-witted. He has half the
standard experience points at character generation, all future
Advancement Totals are halved, and he may not begin with an Ability
above 3. However, with one favored Ability, he is exceptionally gifted.
This Ability can improve normally, is limited to a score of 6 as a
starting character, and has +3 to all rolls related to its
specialization rather than just +1. The Ability must be something he
could reasonably have access to learn; there would need to be an
extraordinary background story for a savant who is a master of the
longsword!

Most savants will be like the tragic fool whose precocious skill with
horses has gone forever unnoticed, but some may have more esoteric
talents. If the favored Ability requires a Virtue, such as Academic or
Martial Abilities, then he must have that Virtue as normal; a
mathematical savant would need a Virtue such as Educated to learn Artes
Liberales. Magi may well desire the company of certain specialists: a
Jerbiton maga would appreciate an artistic savant, for example.
Similarly, a Failed Apprentice may have been left stricken with
savantism when his Gift abandoned him, but he retained remarkable
clarity on the Code of Hermes, becoming a valued clerk to a Quaesitor.

**Secretive**

*Minor, Personality*

The character is prone to keeping secrets from his sodales. He rarely
explains what he is doing or why he is doing it, which can frustrate
those around him.

**Seeker**

*Minor, Personality*

You are a self-proclaimed member of the Seekers, a loose organization of
competitive magi searching for ancient magic and arcane artifacts. Much
of your life is spent in pursuit of these items. Your interests may
occasionally clash with other interests of your House or covenant. More
details about the Seekers can be found on page 15 of *Houses of Hermes:
True Lineages.*

**Servant of the (Land)**

*Major, Story*

Some powerful magical creature has saved the character from death or
granted a similar boon, and in return the character has been set a task.
Possible tasks include: preaching a message, operating a lighthouse, or
preventing hunting in a certain area. Usually the task is either
difficult or time-consuming, and while it remains incomplete the
character has the Minor Personality Flaw: Prohibition, but this does not
count toward the character's total number of Virtues and Flaws. The
Prohibition means that if the character does not spend at least one
complete season every year working toward his assigned task, a curse
afflicts him. Possible curses include: a magical compulsion to return to
the land where the character must explain himself to his master, turning
into an animal, or acquiring a Supernatural Flaw.

**Sheltered Upbringing**

*Minor, Personality*

You grew up completely separated from society, knowing only your parents
or mentor. Recently you have been introduced to a wondrous new world of
strangers, and you are overwhelmed. Depending on your personality, you
might react with contempt, fear, or wonder. You are unable to function
normally because you cannot understand most human customs. You may not
take Bargain, Charm, Etiquette, Folk Ken, Guile, Intrigue, or Leadership
as beginning Abilities, but you may learn them in play.

**Short Attention Span**

*Minor, Personality*

You have trouble concentrating. Keeping watch, listening to complex
orders, following the plot of a story, or performing other such tasks
that require continued attention are usually not within your ability.

**Short-Lived Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your spells do not last as long as they should. Spells that should last
a year, last a moon; those of a moon, only to the next sunrise or
sundown; and those of a sun, merely Diameter. Diameter, Concentration,
Ring, and Momentary spells are not affected.

**Short of Breath**

*Minor, General*

The character cannot last as long as others when exerting himself and
quickly tires during extended physical activity. He receives a --3
penalty to all Stamina rolls to avoid fatigue, including rolls to
maintain Concentration.

**Short-Ranged Magic**

*Major, Hermetic*

Halve your Casting Totals whenever you are not touching the target of
the spell. Halve your Lab Total when designing an effect or spell that
has a range greater than Touch, including Eye.

**Simple-Minded**

*Minor, Personality*

You can only think about one thing at a time --- guarding the bridge,
hunting for a missing ring, or hiding in the trees for example. You
become easily confused unless others give you very clear instructions.
When unexpected circumstances pop up, you find them difficult to deal
with.

**Sleep Disorder**

*Minor, General*

More often than not, this character is unable to sleep soundly during
the night. The resulting deprivation means that he is likely to nod off
in periods of quiet and boredom. When the character is alone,
comfortable, bored, or otherwise at risk of falling asleep, he needs to
make a suitable Personality roll to avoid nodding off. Loyal, Reliable,
and Lazy (for a penalty in the last case) are all appropriate. The
character's current Fatigue penalty applies to the roll.

Regardless of whether he manages to stay awake, the following night you
must make a stress roll (no botch) against an Ease Factor of 6 to see if
the character sleeps well. Every night he has slept poorly, he loses a
Long Term Fatigue Level. Continue this until he sleeps soundly for a
whole night. Once he has lost 3 Long Term Fatigue Levels, he
automatically sleeps through the night, due to sheer exhaustion. This
Flaw is not compatible with the Night Ter- rors Flaw.

**Slothful**

*Minor, Personality*

The character is lazy and indolent, and enjoys nothing better than doing
as little as possible. He is very good at coming up with excuses as to
why things need not be done right now. When roused into action, he works
as hard as any other, but is constantly looking for opportunities to
lapse into sloth again.

**Slow Caster**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your magic requires more time to prepare and execute than that of other
magi. Your Formulaic spells take two rounds to cast; Spontaneous spells
also take two rounds unless you fast-cast, in which case they take one
round casting time. Fast-cast Mastered spells also take the normal
one-round time. You can still cast Muto Vim spells on your own spells,
but the casting process takes longer. Ritual spells and ceremonial
castings are performed as normal, since all magi must cast them slowly
and carefully.

**Slow Power**

*Minor, Supernatural*

One of the character's supernatural powers is very slow, so that it
requires an additional round of preparation to activate. This Flaw may
be taken more than once, if the character has multiple powers, but not
more than once for a single power.

**Slow Reflexes**

*Minor, General*

The character does not react well to surprises. He receives a --3 to his
Initiative total in situations warranting a quick response.

**Small Frame**

*Minor, General*

You are of a lighter-than-average build. Your Size is reduced to --1.
This means that the severity of wounds you take increases in four point
increments, rather than five point. (See page @@). You cannot take this
Flaw and Giant Blood (page @@), Large (page @@), or Dwarf (page @@).

**Social Handicap**

*Minor, General*

You have some trait that keeps you from interacting easily with other
people. This impairs your dealings with most of society, causing
penalties of --3 on appropriate rolls. Examples include morose
temperament, unworldliness, an unpleasant odor, or tactlessness.

**Soft-Hearted**

*Minor, Personality*

You cannot bear to witness suffering, and causing it brings you
sleepless nights. Even the deaths of enemies are painful for you. You
avoid danger and try to keep your friends out of it as well. Life and
health mean so much that you would rather give up important goals than
let another person risk combat. You are easily moved by song and story.

**Spontaneous Casting Tools**

*Minor, Hermetic*

The character must use casting tools to cast spontaneous spells just as
he does for casting formulaic spells. He has 15 individual tools, one
for each Art, which he must use in various combinations to cast
spontaneous spells. This Flaw can only be taken by Verditius magi.

**Stigmatic Catalyst**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character's presence sometimes causes symbolic marks to appear on
the bodies of people without Magic Resistance nearby. The character
cannot control this process, but may make Intelligence + Enigmatic
Wisdom rolls against an Ease Factor of 6 to tell those so afflicted what
form of spiritual purification they must undergo for the stigma to
disappear. Characters who are stigmatized may have a hostile reaction if
they realize the source of the stigmata. This Flaw is normally found
among magi of House Criamon, and magi of that House would be interested
in any other character who manifested it.

**Stockade Parma Magica**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Because of your restricted understanding of Parma Magica, you cannot
suppress your Parma once it is erected. Any friendly spell or magical
affect must penetrate your Parma Magica to affect you, just as if it
were a hostile spell.

**Stuck in Your Ways**

*Minor, General*

Having come from a covenant, this character knows how things must be
done to best serve the needs of covenfolk and magi alike. Only, his new
home does things differently. And they're wrong. When making Stress
Rolls against his Profession Abilities or any Ability concerning his new
covenant, such as Leadership or Folk Ken, this character uses the lower
of that Ability score and his current Covenant Lore Ability for his
current covenant. Note that bonuses from Puissant or other Virtues still
apply to the roll.

This Flaw can also be applied to organizations other than covenants,
such as abbeys, universities, guilds, or churches.

**Study Requirement**

*Major, Hermetic*

You are unable to study magic from books or vis alone. You must study in
the presence of the appropriate Art. For example, you need to sit next
to a brook or pond to study Aquam, or a large fire to study Ignem.
Growing things are good for Creo, decaying ones good for Perdo. As your
knowledge grows, you need to work with larger and larger quantities. See
the Study Bonus Virtue on page @@ for a list of examples.

You may take both Study Bonus and Study Requirement.

**Supernatural Nuisance**

*Major, Story*

Supernatural entities of a certain kind interfere in your life in minor
ways whenever you are around them. This differs from Plagued by
Supernatural Entity in that the nuisances do not have any long-term
plans. This could represent a ghost that haunts you, or general enmity
from faeries towards you.

**Suppressed Gift**

*Major, Hermetic, Story*

The character has The Gift but cannot access its power, having
temporarily lost his magical ability through mishap or some other
misfortune. While the Gift is suppressed, the character cannot perform
Hermetic magic, improve his Arts, or perform the Parma Magica. His Arts
do provide him with Magic Resistance and he continues to suffer the
negative social penalties of The Gift. Such a character may still use
Supernatural Virtues and Abilities. He may be a member of the Order of
Hermes, depending on when his Gift was suppressed.

How The Gift returns should be decided by the storyguide. Examples are
surviving a laboratory disaster while assisting another magus (perhaps
that was how Suppressed Gift was gained), comprehending a Temporary
Twilight while in a powerful regio, visiting the Magic Realm and
succeeding in some task, or undergoing a year's instruction from an
elder dragon.

The troupe should consider carefully how the character will fit into the
saga. If he replaces a player's magus, he has a very serious Flaw. If he
replaces a companion, he will become much more powerful when the Story
Flaw is resolved. Either approach can work, with care.

**Surgical Empiricus**

*Minor, Social Status*

You are a chirurgeon by trade, but have never received a wide grounding
in the subject; rather your training has focused on only a single aspect
of Chirurgy. Pick a type of surgery as your specialization in that
Ability (couching cataracts, removal of stones, bone-setting, etc.).
When performing this type of surgery, you get the usual +1 bonus to your
roll, but when trying to employ any other application of Chirurgy, you
must halve your score in Chirurgy due to your inexperience. It is likely
that you travel to get enough clientele for your practice, but can
usually earn a good living.

**Susceptibility to Divine Power**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You are especially sensitive to the Dominion and suffer twice the normal
penalties (such as spellcasting modifiers and botch dice) to your magic
when in a Divine aura.

**Susceptibility to Faerie Power**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You are especially susceptible to the fay and their magic. Whenever you
enter a Faerie aura, you must make a Stamina roll equal to or greater
than its aura rating to avoid becoming disoriented. In addition, your
Magic Resistance score, including Parma Magica, against faerie effects
is halved. If someone else uses their Parma Magica to protect you, their
resistance is not affected and you benefit normally.

**Susceptibility to Infernal Power**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You are especially vulnerable to the dark powers. Whenever you enter an
area of Infernal influence, you must make a Stamina roll equal to or
greater than the aura rating or become ill (--1 on all rolls). You get
only half your normal Magic Resistance score against infernal effects,
though if someone else\'s Parma Magica is protecting you, it counts
normally.

**Susceptibility to Sunlight**

*Minor, Supernatural*

Direct, bright sunlight causes you noticeable pain and exhausts you.
Attuned to darkness, your eyes are very sensitive, and you suffer from a
--2 penalty to all rolls involving sight in bright environments such as
a cloudless day. Due to your malediction, you lose one Fatigue level per
Diameter if outdoors at noon on a hot summer day, and lose levels more
slowly in less-intense light and warmth from the sun.

**Susceptibility to Warping**

*Minor, Supernatural*

Your character's constant exposure to magic has made him more
susceptible to supernatural Warping than he might otherwise be.

In any year in which the character gains a Warping Point from any Realm
or any source (including Longevity Rituals, living within an aura, and
powerful supernatural effects), the character gains one additional
Warping Point associated with that same Realm. This means that if he
gains a single Warping Point from each Realm in a year, he gains four
additional Warping Points, one from each Realm, at the end of that year.

These additional points do not contribute to Wizard's Twilight or to
other events caused by the acquisition of Warping Points as they accrete
slowly over the course of the year.

**Tainted Offspring**

*Major, Story, Tainted*

The character has a child who has been marked for great, but unpleasant,
things by a powerful demon. The character must struggle not only with
the servants the demon sends to subvert the child, but the child's own
tendency toward evil.

**Tainted With Evil**

*Minor, General*

An air of corruption surrounds you as a result of something you, your
parents, or your ancestors did. Others naturally feel very ill at ease
around you, and can easily grow to hate you. Gaining a positive
Reputation is impossible. Magi do not react as strongly to this
attribute as normal people.

**Temperate**

*Minor, Personality*

You do not over-indulge in any sensual pleasures.

**Tormenting Master**

*Major, Story*

Your master does not believe you have successfully passed the
apprentice\'s gauntlet (the test of becoming a magus). He periodically
troubles you with political moves and indirect attacks. This Flaw is
only applicable to magi, although other characters could take an
analogous Story Flaw.

**Tragic Life**

*Major, Story, Tainted*

The character's life has been manipulated by demons to ensure that she
will act in a certain way in response to important events, usually to
her own detriment and in such a way as to further a particular demon's
aims. This means that she is a tainted character.

Tainted characters are produced as tools, to influence pivotal events.
This Flaw represents two factors: the events that the demons have
designed the person to influence are likely to happen, and the person
has been designed and conditioned to behave predictably when her moment
of destiny arrives. Tainted people are likely, at their point of
destiny, to choose to sin, and so cause terrible events. The
repercussions of the tragedy they create often harm the tainted person.
The predisposition toward sin at the character's pivotal moment should
be represented with a sinful Personality Trait.

Tainted people have difficult lives, but are not doomed from the moment
of their conception. They have five sources of hope.

Demons do not foresee the future, they simply predict it through
extremely skilled judgments. Arbitrary occurrences can ruin their
schemes.

The process of creating and training tainted people contains random
factors. These include inherited Flaws, like Tainted with Evil or
Disfigured, which are personally painful, but might distance the
character from her designed destiny.

The character's relationships with other humans also provide
unpredictable elements. Most significantly, virtuous humans may notice
the tainted person's tendency toward a certain type of sin, and teach
them to resist it.

Humans have free will. All deception aside, the tainted person still has
the power to choose not to perform sins. The tainted person may not
understand this, or may feel that the sin she performed is minor and
justified given the situation in which she is presented with her choice,
but the choice is still entirely and absolutely hers.

Finally, the agents of the Divine meddle in the plans of Infernal lords.

Tainted characters are designed for specific situations. Characters who
struggle successfully against their destiny find that their creator
cannot usually fashion an alternative situation to which the tainted
person is perfectly suited. The tainted character loses the Tragic Life
Flaw, but usually gains the Plagued by Supernatural Entity Flaw instead,
as the demonic lord vents his spite on the character.

**True Love**

*Major or Minor, Story*

You have found the one person meant for you in all of creation, and the
bond between the two of you cannot be sundered. Whenever you are
suffering, in danger, or dejected, the thought of your love will give
you strength to persevere. In dire need, he may even come to rescue you.
More often, he will be in trouble and need rescuing. If any enchantment
keeps you from your true love\'s side, the power of your devotion can
probably break it. Your love is higher than mortal magic, and no magic
can make you hate your love, or make you truly betray him. Your True
Love must be a non-player character. To have another player character as
your True Love, see the True Love Virtue on page @@.

This Story Hook may be renamed \'True Friend\' to cover characters with
whom you are very closely linked, but not in a romantic way.

If the True Love is significantly weaker than the player character, and
not able to provide useful assistance in most cases, this is a Major
Flaw. If the True Love is competent, equal to or better than the player
character, then this is only a Minor Flaw. The True Love may need
rescuing occasionally, but more often she will involve the player
character in her plans.

**Twilight Prone**

*Major, Hermetic*

You either enjoy or cannot help running excessive amounts of magic
through you when you cast spells. You must roll to resist Twilight on a
single magical botch, rather than on a double botch like most magi.

**Tzadik Nistar**

*Major, Story*

Your character is one of the Tzadikim Nistarim, one of the 36 hidden
righteous upon which the continuation of the world relies. She is
destined to face a moment of moral decision, where she and the world
through her will be tested. This moment could be small and personal, or
it require a very public act. The result of failing in her test has
immediate consequences defined by the storyguide. The Dominion may fall
in her community or in the place of her moral failure; the Infernal may
claim a new soul; or a whole region may face severe hardship until she
puts right her failure. Although this is a Jewish tradition, a character
need not be Jewish to take this Flaw. She may suspect that she has been
chosen as one of the 36, but she does not know in advance what her
personal test will be, though it may be discovered by consulting with
prophets and learned men.

**Unbaptized**

*Major, Story*

You are a Christian who has never been baptized for whatever reason,
perhaps because you have some kind of supernatural background that might
be undone by the ceremony --- many magi believe that baptism impairs The
Gift. Your faith is important enough to you that you still strive to be
virtuous and attend Mass, though you do not benefit from the sacraments.
Most common people who discover this fear and avoid you.

**Unbearable to (Beings)**

*Minor, Hermetic or General*

This Flaw is associated with one of three classes of beings: mundane
humans, demons, or divine beings. These last two include characters
associated with the Divine or the Infernal realms, respectively, through
Supernatural Virtues or Flaws, as well as beings with Divine or Infernal
Might.

These beings are extremely disturbed, frightened, and possibly enraged
by the character's presence. She suffers an additional --3 penalty on
all social interactions with them, which adds to the --3 penalty
normally associated with The Gift. Only characters with The Gift or
Magical Air may take this Flaw, and it cannot be combined with the
Blatant Gift.

You may not take this Flaw more than once; characters who are Unbearable
to more than one kind of being should take the Blatant Gift instead.

**Uncertain Faith**

*Minor, General*

Whether through a flaw in the character's understanding of doctrine, a
moral turmoil, the disheartening absolution of repeated sins, or
exposure to conflicting philosophies, he finds it hard to fully express
devotion to his faith. Some element of doubt stands between him and the
Divine, and all rolls for holy influence, tempering an aura, invoking
God's aid, or invoking a saint or *baraka* (see *Realms of Power: The
Divine Revised Edition,* pages 38--41, 87, and 103) suffer a --3
penalty.

The character also has an "Uncertain Faith" Personality Trait at +1 that
describes this conflict or doubt, which always provides demons with an
opportunity to sow further doubt through their Obsession power (*Realms
of Power: The Infernal*, page 31).

Supernatural Abilities originating from the Divine, including Methods
and Powers, are not penalized. This Flaw is not compatible with the True
Faith Virtue.

**Uncontrollable Strength**

*Minor, General*

This character doesn't know his own strength, and at times he has
trouble controlling it. This Flaw may not be taken if the character's
Strength is below 0. Whenever he handles delicate or fragile objects,
whenever care must be taken to knock somebody out gently, and so on, he
risks overdoing it, severely. The character must make a stress roll
against an Ease Factor of 6 to avoid using too much power and causing
damage of some kind. In addition to this, any Strength Stress Roll uses
one extra botch die.

**Unhappily Married**

*Major, Story*

Young merchants often marry for financial reasons. The nobility are
often required to marry to form or strengthen alliances. The character
has married for money or politics, not love, and seeks solace outside
his marital bed. Unhappily married characters must hide their affairs of
the heart from their spouses, their spouses' families, and possibly from
their partners' spouses. In many areas, separation due to infidelity is
permitted, although this is not divorce. In many such cases the wife's
dowry must be returned, in part or full. In the case of the nobility,
this could even lead to a small, local war, or a Feud.

**Unimaginative Learner**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You have trouble figuring things out for yourself. Subtract 3 from rolls
when you study from raw vis.

**Uninspirational**

*Minor, General*

This character is bland, boring, and simple, with almost no chance of
ever getting noticed or enticing anyone. His Presence and Communication
may not be greater than 0. Any use of Abilities like Leadership, Charm,
Intrigue, Etiquette or similar --- as well as Personality Rolls --- to
stir or impress people suffers a --3 penalty.

**University Dean**

*Major, Story*

The character is the head of a university, having already acquired his
doctor in (faculty) license. The character has been chosen to lead the
university, overseeing external affairs with the town and internal
affairs between students and masters. Though prestigious, the position
imposes serious demands on the character's time. The character can
expect many interruptions in his teaching during the school year. The
character must have the Virtue Doctor in (Faculty), be at least 40 years
old, and can not have the Poor Flaw or any other Flaw that grants a Bad
Reputation.

**Unlucky**

*Minor, General*

The character is exceptionally unlucky, and is frequently dealt a bad
hand by the forces of chance. He gets a --1 to --3 penalty (at
storyguide's discretion) on rolls in situations based on luck rather
than skill or talent, depending on how much luck is involved. It would
be wise for him not to take part in games of chance.

**Unnatural Magic**

*Major, Hermetic*

Because of the unreal and illusory nature of your magic, none of the
character's Creo rituals have a permanent effect. Wounds magically
closed with *The Chirurgeon's Healing Touch* (CrCo20), for example,
reopen again as soon as he finishes casting the spell, as the magic
truly lasts only a moment. He also cannot extract vis from an aura using
Creo, since his version of that Art is too unstable for the vis to
remain in a lasting physical form.

**Unpredictable Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You always roll a stress die when using magic, even if completely
relaxed. If you choose to cast a Spontaneous spell without expending
fatigue, you must still roll to check for a botch, although the roll
does not add to your Casting Total. Even if you have Mastered a spell,
you must always roll at least one botch die.

**Unruly Air**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character has a penchant for stirring up situations, making pleasant
events better and unpleasant ones worse. Whenever the character is in a
social situation with multiple people, his slightest behavior will
subtly push others to extreme behavior. He is either the life of the
party, or its death, depending on the prevailing mood of the crowd. His
influence is linked to his magical nature, so that others with Magic
Resistance are not influenced by him.

**Unspecialized**

*Minor, General*

The character does not have any specialties for any of her Abilities.

**Unstructured Caster**

*Major, Hermetic*

You have never quite mastered the intricacies of spellcasting, and are
unable to perform Formulaic magic without extreme effort. You cast all
Formulaic spells as though they were Ritual spells (including the need
for vis), and you may not learn Ritual spells at all. You cast
Spontaneous spells normally.

**Usurer**

*Minor, Social Status*

You often lend silver or other valuables to people at interest rates
that many consider abusive. You get away with this somehow, possibly
because you belong to a group that can avoid moral judgment for these
actions, because you operate outside of the law, or perhaps because you
lend a type of currency not accepted by the mundane population. You
receive the equivalent of approximately ten pounds of silver each year
from interest payments, though you may occasionally need to chase down
debtors, and you have a poor reputation (Usurer) at level 4 within your
community and the local region.

**Vendetta**

*Major, Story*

The magus is engaged in one of House Verditius' vendettas, mostly likely
carrying on his parens's vendetta against another Verditius magus. This
vendetta stops just short of physical injury to him or the other.
Neither of them will bring this feud to the Quaesitores, wishing to
finish it themselves. The magus with whom he is feuding must be an NPC,
who regularly takes some sort of action with which the character must
contend. This Flaw is generally restricted to magi of House Verditius,
as the custom of vendetta is limited to that House. Other characters
should take Enemy or Feud to represent a similar situation.

**Vengeful Powers**

*Major, Story, Tainted*

The character has one or more non-Infernal Powers in which the Infernal
realm has taken a personal interest. Whenever she uses one of these
Powers in a way that is not sinful, it has an unpleasant side effect.
This is always harmful, and often recognizably Infernal, and the
severity varies depending upon the Power's application, so that
extremely good works cause even more terrible evil. The effect is not
obviously linked to the use of the Power, and in fact it may seem
completely unrelated. It always manifests at about the same time as the
use of the Power, however, though the character may not be aware of
this.

Some potential side effects might include:

Illness and disease among local people or animals.

Open sores and other painful wounds.

Distrust and a bad reputation among strangers.

Infernal auras in the surrounding area.

Negative or sinful Personality Traits.

Additional botch dice on a particular type of roll.

Demons suddenly causing havoc in the region.

The forces that wreak vengeance cannot cross Magic Resistance or effects
like *Aegis of the Hearth* that keep demons away, yet they can still
sense when these Powers are put to good use, and they retaliate however
they can.

The character may not know about these circumstances, but once she
realizes the relationship between her Power and these side effects, they
usually seem much worse, as paranoia and guilt may cause her to worry
about the potential harm her Powers may cause. Hell hopes that this
makes using the Power for good seem too great a sacrifice.

Vengeful Powers may be taken as a Hermetic Flaw, as applicable to
Hermetic magic. In that case, the effect triggers whenever the character
performs magic that is without sin. It is more commonly associated with
Supernatural Abilities, however.

**Viaticarus**

*Minor, Supernatural*

At some point in the character's past, he was at death's door, and as a
result a priest performed the sacrament of Extreme Unction. The purpose
of this sacrament was to remit him of all venial sins, and prepare him
for the journey beyond (the viaticum); but against all expectations, he
survived. This leaves him in a spiritual no-man's land, not one of the
dead, but neither wholly of the living. Because of this, he is immune to
the temptations of demons, and therefore cannot be affected by their
Obsession power; he simply does not register to them as a soul in need
of corruption. However, his skin has an unusual pallor, and his eyes are
sunken. People may smell a charnel odor about him. These effects are
subtle at first, but as he ages, he gradually comes to resemble a corpse
more and more, resulting in a penalty to all social interaction rolls
equal to his Decrepitude score.

He has difficulty crossing thresholds where unquiet spirits are not
welcome; if a person with a (Realm) Lore of 1 or more has set up a
traditional ward, such as a line of salt or an iron nail laid on the
lintel, then he cannot enter the protected building or area. Further,
although he does not have a Might score, he is repulsed by any magical
warding that can keep out a creature with a Might score aligned to
Corpus or Mentem (including the *Aegis of the Hearth*), regardless of
its level or Penetration. However, both types of exclusion can be
negated if he is invited to cross by the person who established the
ward, or someone who lives within. He can still touch individuals with
Magic Resistance, since he has no active power around him.

If the character's status is known in the community in which he lives,
he should take the Outcast Social Status Flaw.

**Visions**

*Minor, Story, Supernatural*

You often see images related to emotionally or magically laden events. A
vision might be of the past, a possible future, or a distant occurrence,
and is often symbolic or confusing. Visions usually come to you at quiet
times or in places connected with a powerful emotional or magical event,
such as the site of a patricide or diabolic sacrifice. Your visions may
warn you of dangers to come, or get you involved in matters you would
otherwise have avoided.

The visions come purely at the storyguide\'s discretion, and reveal only
what he wants to reveal.

**Vow**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You have sworn to do something difficult, and breaking your vow is a
serious matter. Example vows include never raising a weapon, never
speaking, or living in poverty. If you do fail to uphold your vow, you
must perform some kind of atonement, whether it be religious penance or
coming to terms with your failure in some other way. A Vow that is a
Major Flaw must be a vow to do something, rather than refrain from
something, so that it can drive you to act.

**Vulnerable Casting**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Some magi are better able to withstand the Fatigue loss of casting
spells, and some less so. If a maga has this Flaw, then whenever she is
about to lose Fatigue from casting a spell, she loses 1 more Fatigue
level than normal. If the spell would have been cast without Fatigue
loss, then she still loses no Fatigue.

A maga may have, or acquire, this Flaw more than once, losing 1 extra
Fatigue level for each level of this Flaw. If she has Vulnerable Casting
(2), then she loses 2 extra Fatigue levels whenever she casts a
fatiguing spell.

Magi of the Mercurian cults often succumb to this Flaw, but other magi
may suffer from it, regardless of their affiliation.

The Flaw increases the severity of the Fatigue lost, in the exact manner
of the existing Fatigue loss. Thus, if a maga casts a Formulaic spell,
the Fatigue is short-term Fatigue, easily recovered, and if she runs out
of Fatigue levels she is rendered unconscious, loss of extra Fatigue
levels results in her being unconscious for one hour for each
overflowing level, and so does the Fatigue from Vulnerable Casting. If,
on the other hand, she casts a Ritual spell, then this is long-term
Fatigue, and losing more Fatigue than she has remaining causes wounds,
so the increased Fatigue of Vulnerable Casting does the same.

You may not start your character with both Vulnerable Casting and
Withstand Casting, but the maga may acquire either in the course of play
(from Initiation, Ordeals, or Twilight effects). In this case, apply the
vulnerability first, then withstand the increased loss.

**Vulnerable Magic**

*Major, Hermetic*

The character's magic is automatically dispelled in certain uncommon
circumstances. Examples include: when touching iron, when under the
influence of the Divine, when crossing over running water, when his name
is spoken three times, or when he is not touching the ground. This
condition immediately ends the duration of a spell when it is applied to
the target, or all of your active spells when applied to you.

This Flaw may be taken multiple times, so long as a different condition
is specified for each. It may not be combined with Restrictions or
Necessary Conditions that have the same (or equivalent) conditions.

**Wanderlust**

*Major, Story*

The character feels compelled to travel with a passion that is so strong
that he cannot spend more than a season in the same place. The character
can only spend two (nonconsecutive) seasons each year in the same area,
and must spend the intervening seasons traveling to different locales
--- places he has never been. If for some reason he cannot travel, he
will become very uncomfortable; this discomfort should cause stories in
the same way as the travel would.

**Warped by Magic**

*Minor, Supernatural*

The character's adventures have exposed him to powerful magical forces
that have left a mark on him. He has five Warping Points and a Warping
Score of 1, including a Minor Flaw (which is not balanced by a Virtue)
that somehow reflects the source of the Warping. His encounters allow
you to spend experience points on Magic Lore during character creation.
A magus may take this Flaw to represent Warping gained before his
apprenticeship. With the permission of the troupe, this Flaw may be
modified to represent Warping from other Realms.

**Warped Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your magic is accompanied by some unpleasant side effect that always
manifests itself the same way, but with increasing intensity according
to the level of the spell. Examples include nearby items become hot or
nearby plant matter becomes shriveled and wilted. This effect may cause
trouble from time to time, but is usually just annoying.

**Warped Senses**

*Minor, General*

The character has become overly sensitive to environmental conditions,
which affects his behavior in certain uncommon circumstances. Some
examples include:

**Sensitive (Sense):** One of your senses is so sensitive that it is
overwhelmed under circumstances that others find normal. If it is sight,
normal daylight dazzles you. If it is hearing, sounds above normal
speaking volume hurt your ears. If it is taste, only bland food is
tolerable. If it is smell, strong odors, good or bad, are nauseating.
You suffer a --2 penalty on all activities under relevant circumstances.
(It is inadvisable to combine Sensitive Sight with Keen Vision, and
Sensitive Hearing with Sharp Ears, and these are incompatible with Blind
and Deaf, respectively.)

**Weak (Sense):** One of your senses is so weak that it is useless under
circumstances that others find normal. If it is sight, you can only see
well in good illumination (e.g. broad daylight). If it is hearing, you
can only hear sounds above normal speaking volume. If taste, only highly
flavored food is palatable. If smell, you can only detect strong odors.
You suffer a --2 penalty on all activities under relevant circumstances.
(Weak Sight is incompatible with Sensitive Sight, Keen Vision, and Blind
and you cannot take Weak Hearing with Sensitive Hearing, Sharp Ears, or
Deaf.)

**Sensitive to Cold:** You function normally at temperatures
considerably above the norm for your part of the world. You lose 1
Fatigue level for every hour you spend in an environment two steps or
more below your accustomed conditions on the Environmental Temperatures
chart (see sidebar). Your responses to heat are reduced in intensity by
2 (page @@).

**Sensitive to Heat:** You function normally at temperatures
considerably below the norm for your part of the world. You lose 1
Fatigue level for every hour you spend in an environment two steps or
more above your habituated conditions on the Environmental Temperatures
chart (see sidebar). Your response to ice is reduced in intensity to 0
(page @@).

This is a common Flaw for characters who become Warped by a strong magic
environment.

Environmental Temperatures

Unnaturally hot

As hot as being next to a raging fire, molten lava, or molten iron

Tropical mid-day

As warm as a fine summer's day in southern Europe

Comfortable for a normal inhabitant of the Normandy, Rhine, Stonehenge,
and Hibernia Tribunals

As cold as a chilly winter's day in Western Europe

Arctic winter

Unnaturally cold

**Waster of Vis**

*Major, Hermetic*

When you use raw vis you waste one quarter (rounded up) of the pawns you
apply. The lost raw vis does not apply to the magical effect being
enacted but does count toward the total number of botch dice you must
roll if you roll a zero. You must use a third again as many pawns as
usual when casting a ritual spell, and if you want to improve an Art
score by studying raw vis, you must use a third again as many pawns as
usual. This Flaw applies to all occasions on which you use vis,
including certamen, laboratory work, and boosting penetration. Wasted
pawns count toward the maximum number you can use at one time.

For example, if you would normally use 12 pawns, you must use 16, and 4,
one quarter of those you use, are wasted. If you would normally need 10
pawns, you must use 14, because 4 pawns are wasted.

**Weak Characteristics**

*Minor, General*

You have three fewer points to spend buying Characteristics than most
characters. You may take this Flaw twice, leaving you with only one
point to spend.

**Weak Enchanter**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your Gift is ill attuned to creating enchanted devices. Halve your Lab
Total whenever you create or investigate an enchanted item. If you have
a Deficiency that counts as part of the Lab Total, apply the Deficiency
first and then halve the remaining total.

**Weak Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your magic is particularly bad at penetrating Magic Resistance. You
halve the normal Penetration Total for all spells, and only get half the
normal benefit when instilling Penetration into an item. Note that you
halve the Penetration Total, after subtracting the spell level and
making any adjustments for the use of Arcane Connections. You do not
halve the Casting Total and calculate Penetration from that.

**Weak Magic Resistance**

*Major, Hermetic*

Any form of Magic Resistance you generate is much weaker under
relatively common circumstances which are fairly easy for an opponent to
utilize, such as when you are wet or facing away from the caster of the
spell. If the conditions are met, do not subtract the level of the
effect from the casting total before calculating Penetration. You would
be well advised to keep your weakness from being discovered by too many
potential enemies.

**Weak Parens**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your parens was less powerful or a worse teacher than normal. You gain
60 fewer experience points and 30 fewer spell levels from
apprenticeship, for a total of 180 experience points and 90 levels of
spells.

**Weak Personality**

*Minor, Personality*

This character doesn't feel strongly for or against anything and lacks
the unique traits most people have to make them really stand out.
Consequently, all Personality Traits must be between +1 and --1. When
making personality rolls, treat any roll above 6 as merely 6. The
character may have no other Personality Flaws or Virtues or Flaws that
grant Personality Traits. Depending on the personality of the observer,
he may seem a complete pushover with no opinion of his own, insensitive
because he rarely shows strong emotion, or simply lacking in initiative
to those seeking leadership and guidance. These elements result in a --1
or worse (at the storyguide's discretion) modifier in most social
situations for obviously being a cold fish. Finally, he will never be
known for his great loyalty or pious nature, and will have a hard time
winning respect or getting promoted. His lack of enthusiasm for the
Church in particular might be viewed as a lack of faith. On the plus
side, he might occasionally be seen in a positive light since he never
disagrees strongly.

**Weak Scholar**

*Minor, Hermetic*

You don\'t understand laboratory guidance very well. You get a --6
penalty to Lab Totals when working from the Lab Texts of others,
including when re-inventing spells.

**Weak Spontaneous Magic**

*Major, Hermetic*

You may not exert yourself when casting spontaneous magic, so you always
divide your Casting Score by five. In stressful conditions you must
still roll a stress die to see if you botch, but the die roll does not
add to your casting total. You may still use ceremonial casting.

This Flaw may be combined with Difficult Spontaneous Magic (page @@) to
create a magus who cannot cast spontaneous magic at all.

**Weakness**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You have a soft spot for some sort of object or person. In the face of
this, all else is unimportant: promises are forgotten, duties neglected,
and common sense cast to the winds. Examples include poets and
storytellers, food, flattery, or a pretty face.

**Weak-Willed**

*Minor, Personality*

You look to others for guidance rather than to yourself. What you need
more than anything else is to find someone you can trust.

**Weird Magic**

*Minor, Hermetic*

Your control over magic is somewhat loose, perhaps due to Twilight
effects or idiosyncratic training. Roll one extra botch die when you
roll a zero on stressed spell casting rolls, apart from your other botch
dice. Botches from this die should be strange or bizarre rather than
dangerous, and if the Weird Magic botch occurs along with a regular
botch, the results could be truly spectacular.

**Witch Marks**

*Minor, General, Tainted*

The character has minor disfigurements that those skilled in folk lore
recognize as belonging to diabolists. These marks can be hidden with
clothing. Characters who are thought of as witches are blamed for
misfortunes and may be hounded from towns or killed.

**Wrathful**

*Major or Minor, Personality*

You are prone to anger over the smallest issues, and your rage when you
are thwarted in something major is terrible to behold.
