Abilities

Abilities represent the things that a character has learned over the
course of her life. They increase over the course of a saga, as people
continue learning all the time.

Abilities are normally used by adding Characteristic + Ability + die
roll, and comparing to an Ease Factor. In principle, any Characteristic
can be used with any Ability, but some pairings are rare; Strength +
Order of Hermes Lore, for example, is unlikely to be called upon very
often. The appropriate Characteristic should be chosen based on the
descriptions of the Characteristics given in the Characters chapter
(page @@), although the rules for magic and combat specify the pairings
for a number of important situations.

Specializations

Each Ability you select for your character, except Spell Mastery, should
be assigned a specialization. When you are using an Ability in a way
that incorporates your specialization, you act as if your score were one
level higher than it actually is. For example, if you have the skill
Single Weapon 3, with the specialization longsword, you act as if your
Single Weapon is 4 when using longswords.

Suggested specializations for each Ability are listed at the end of each
description. Other specializations are possible with the permission of
your troupe.

Abilities With No Score

If a character has no score in an Ability, she may or may not be able to
use it. If the Ability is not asterisked in the list from page @@, she
may use it as if it had a score of zero, but rolling three extra botch
dice. If it is asterisked, she cannot use it at all.

A character who has placed a single experience point into an Ability may
use it with a score of zero, with no extra botch dice, regardless of
whether or not it is asterisked. Experience points represent a
noticeable amount of training, and thus make the Ability available to
the character.

Characters cannot use Supernatural Abilities unless they have at least
one experience point in the Ability. Most characters cannot put
experience points into any Supernatural Abilities. In most cases, a
character needs a particular Virtue in order to put experience points
into a particular Supernatural Ability, but there are exceptions. The
most important exception is The Gift, which is covered later, and other
exceptions are described in supplements.

Ability Types

There are six types of Ability: General Abilities, Academic Abilities,
Arcane Abilities, Martial Abilities, Spell Mastery Abilities, and
Supernatural Abilities. Most of these are used in the same way; the
difference lies in who can learn them. Spell Mastery Abilities are a bit
different, and are discussed in Chapter 7: Hermetic Magic.

General Abilities

Almost anyone in Mythic Europe has the opportunity to learn these
Abilities, and there are no game restrictions on who may do so. Even
animals have some of these Abilities, although they learn them in
different ways from intelligent creatures.

Academic Abilities

Academic Abilities require formal training. Beginning characters may
only purchase Academic Abilities if they are specifically permitted to
through the purchase of a Virtue, or if they are magi. Magi without a
specific Virtue may only buy Academic Abilities during or after
apprenticeship. In addition, learning an Academic Knowledge requires a
Latin, Greek, Hebrew, or Arabic score of at least 3, depending on the
region of Europe you are from. For most characters, Latin 3 is required.

Medieval study is based on the auctores, or authorities, in each
subject. These auctores are not regarded as infallible or as having said
all of what there is to be said on a subject. They are, however,
supposed to have gotten the essentials right and to have accurately
divided the subject into its categories. Thus, a medieval scholar might
suggest that Aristotle was wrong about a certain kind of logical
fallacy, but he would not suggest that Aristotle was completely wrong
about logic or that there were fallacies that did not fall under any of
his classifications.

Arcane Abilities

A character may only take these Abilities during character generation if
permitted to by a Virtue, or if he is a magus. Some Virtues allow a
character to take a particular Arcane Ability, but not the others, while
other Virtues allow a character to take any Arcane Ability. Any Virtue
giving a character a Supernatural Ability that may need to Penetrate
Magic Resistance also allows the character to take the Penetrate
Ability. Magi without a relevant Virtue may only take Arcane Abilities
during or after apprenticeship.

Martial Abilities

Characters may only gain Martial Abilities during character generation
if they are permitted to do so by a particular Virtue or Flaw, or if
they are magi. Magi without a relevant Virtue or Flaw may only take
Martial Abilities during and after apprenticeship.

Spell Mastery Abilities

Spell Mastery Abilities can only be taken by magi, as they concern the
casting of Formulaic and Ritual spells in Hermetic magic. They are
described in the Hermetic Magic chapter, on page @@.

Supernatural Abilities

Characters may only gain Supernatural Abilities during character
creation if they have the Virtue granting the Ability. Characters with
The Gift who are not magi may learn a single Supernatural Ability during
character creation.

Most of these Supernatural Abilities are granted by the Magic or Faerie
realms, and use the relevant column on the realm interaction table (page
@@). Most can also be granted by the Infernal realm, but taking such an
Ability suggests some sort of deal with Infernal powers. Sense Holiness
and Unholiness is the main exception, as a Divine power. If you have no
reason to choose otherwise, your Ability is granted by the Magic realm,
which makes you immune to warping from powerful Magic auras (see page
@@). An Ability granted by another realm makes you immune to warping
from powerful auras associated with that realm, instead.

The Gift allows characters to learn Supernatural Abilities in play (see
page @@). However, The Gift is associated with the Realm of Magic, and
thus only allows characters to learn Supernatural Abilities associated
with that realm.

Abilities by Type

**General Abilities**

Animal Handling

(Area) Lore\*

Athletics

Awareness

Bargain

Brawl

Carouse

Charm

Chirurgy\*

Concentration

Craft (Type)

Etiquette

Folk Ken

Guile

Hunt

Intrigue

Judaic Lore

Leadership

Legerdemain\*

(Living Language)\*

Music

(Mystery Cult) Lore

(Organization) Lore

Profession (Type)

Ride

Stealth

Survival

Swim

Teaching

**Academic Abilities**

Art of Memory\*

Artes Liberales\*

Civil and Canon Law\*

Common Law\*

(Dead Language)\*

Islamic Law\*

Medicine\*

Philosophiae\*

Rabbinic Law\*

Theology: Christian\*

Theology: Islam\*

Theology: Judaism\*

**Arcane Abilities**

Code of Hermes\*

Dominion Lore\*

Enigmatic Wisdom\*

Faerie Lore\*

Faerie Magic\*

Finesse

Heartbeast\*

Infernal Lore\*

Magic Lore\*

Magic Theory\*

Parma Magica\*

Penetration

**Martial Abilities**

Bows

Great Weapon

Single Weapon

Thrown Weapon

**Supernatural Abilities**

Animal Ken\*

Corpse Magic\*

Crafter's Healing\*

Curse-Throwing\*

Dowsing\*

Embitterment\*

Enchanting (Ability)\*

Entrancement\*

Font of Knowledge\*

Hex\*

Induction\*

Magic Sensitivity\*

Persona\*

Premonitions\*

Second Sight\*

Sense Holiness and Unholiness\*

Sense Passions\*

Shapeshifter\*

Summon Animals\*

Whistle Up The Wind\*

Wilderness Sense\*

Ability List

This list contains all Abilities, in alphabetical order. The type of the
Ability is given in parentheses at the end of its description.

**Animal Handling:** Care and use of animals, including raising,
tending, grooming, and healing them. Specialties: falconry, specific
animals. (General)

**Animal Ken:** You can communicate with animals as if they were human
beings. Treat your score in Animal Ken as your score in a language that
the animal speaks fluently in order to determine how well you can
communicate, and you can use Animal Handling as a substitute for any
social abilities affecting humans. Beyond this, this Ability has no
effect on the attitude of animals to you, or you to animals. Other
people cannot understand your communication with the animals.
Specialties: a particular type of animal, a particular type of
communication. (Supernatural)

**(Area) Lore\*:** Knowledge of one particular region, covenant, or even
a village. It includes knowing where things are in the immediate area,
local history and legends, and the centers of power in the region. The
smaller the region, the more detailed your knowledge. Specialties:
geography, history, legends, politics, personalities. (General)

**Art of Memory\*:** The Art of Memory deals with the creation of memory
palaces, a form of mnemonic, in which one visualizes a number of loci
(singular locus), where the scholar commits to memory a symbolic
representation of a fact to be remembered.

To memorize a complex scene, image, or piece of writing (such as a long
letter, but not as long as an entire text), the character must succeed
in a roll of

**Stress Die + Intelligence + Art of Memory vs. Ease Factor of 9 (or
higher)**

The Ease Factor may be higher depending on the length or complexity of
the item to be memorized. If the character succeeds, they remember the
item in exact detail, and may recall it at will although it may take
time to explore a locus.

Characters without the Art of Memory may memorize similar items with a
Stress Die + Intelligence roll (with 3 extra botch dice) against the
same Ease Factors, but must also repeat the roll to recall the memory
perfectly. Each roll failed introduces errors in the memory which are
repeated each time it is recalled. Those without the Art of Memory also
lack the well-defined location system of loci. Specialties: an area of
knowledge (Academic)

Memorization Ease Factors

9 (Average) Memorize a single page letter verbatim, a conversation up to
5 minutes long, or a room as seen from a single vantage point, or the
layout (but not contents) of a castle.

12 (Hard) Memorize a letter of up to 12 pages, or an hour\'s
conversation, lecture or debate, or a room explored and seen from many
vantage points, or a whole manor house seen from a single vantage on
each room, or the contents (but not details) of a castle.

18 (Impressive) Memorize an extended missive up to 100 pages, or a
day\'s lecture or debate (such as a day at Tribunal), or a whole manor
house in detail, or the contents of a castle.

Anything longer must be broken into sections and memorized as separate
loci. If the subject matter is highly technical add 3 or even 6 to the
Ease Factor. If the subject is technical and falls within an Ability
that the scholar possesses, the scholar may use that Ability in place of
Art of Memory (but must still roll to recall as well as memorize): for
example a Lawyer using Civil & Canon Law to memorize court proceedings,
or a magus using Magic Theory to recall a Bonisagus expert\'s lecture.

**Artes Liberales\*:** The seven artes liberales, or liberal arts, are
the basis of medieval higher education. Everyone learns them at the
universities before passing on to study other subjects. It would be very
rare for a character to have a score in any other Academic Knowledge
without a score of at least one in this one.

The artes liberales are divided into two groups: the Trivium (grammar,
logic, and rhetoric) and the Quadrivium (arithmetic, geometry,
astronomy, and music). The emphasis at this period is on the Trivium,
but both are taught. (Note that Artes Liberales as a whole is one Skill,
not seven separate ones.)

Grammar concerns theoretical questions of the structure of languages,
rather than the ability to use a specific language (that is covered by
Speak skills). The auctores are Priscian and Donatus. Logic is the study
of the syllogism, and other forms of reasoning discussed by Aristotle.
It is the most important of the arts at this period. Aristotle is the
auctor, in his *logica vetus* and *logica nova*. Rhetoric is the study
of the theory of rhetorical forms: knowledge of the sort of tricks that
an orator can use, rather than the ability to use them. The auctor is
Cicero, especially his *De Inventione*.

Arithmetic is the ability to add and subtract, multiply and divide. The
auctor is Boethius, *De arithmetica*. Geometry is concerned with study
of plane and solid figures, and the auctor is Euclid, in his *Elementa*.
It also deals with the study of light, and Euclid\'s *Optica* is the
authority here. Astronomy is concerned with predicting the positions of
the stars and planets, and the auctor is Ptolemy, in the *Libri
Almagesti*. Music is purely theoretical, the study of proportions and
musical theory, not the ability to sing or play an instrument. The
authority is Boethius, in *De Musica*.

Artes Liberales also covers the ability to read and write. For every
point in the Ability, the character can read and write one writing
system, providing that he knows a language which normally uses that
system: the Latin alphabet, the Greek alphabet, the Arabic alphabet, and
so on.

Specialties: grammar, logic, rhetoric, arithmetic, geometry, astronomy,
music, Ritual magic, Ceremonial magic. (Academic)

**Athletics:** General physical prowess. It includes moving smoothly,
confidently, and with grace. Use of Athletics improves most large-muscle
coordination. Specialties: acrobatics, contortions, grace, jumping,
running. (General)

**Awareness:** Noticing things, be they things you are looking for or
things that you are not expecting. It is also used to see how alert you
are in circumstances that require watchfulness. Specialties:
bodyguarding, keeping watch, alertness, searching. (General)

**Bargain:** The know-how to get the greatest return for a service or
product, while paying the least. It involves reading the person with
whom you haggle, a general knowledge of the value of goods, and
presenting yourself in certain ways. A good haggler can easily overcome
resistance in an inexperienced customer and see through attempts to
over-value most merchandise. Specialties: specific types of products,
hard sell. (General)

**Bows:** Using bows and arrows. Specialties: any one weapon. (Martial)

**Brawl:** Fighting hand-to-hand without weapons, or with the sorts of
improvised weapons you just pick up, including knives. Brawl is also the
Ability used to dodge attacks if you have no Martial Abilities.
Specialties: punches, grapples, knives, dodging. (General)

**Carouse:** The ability to enjoy oneself without suffering adverse
effects. A person with this skill can, for example, consume prodigious
amounts of alcohol without passing out. The skill also covers a
familiarity with acceptable behavior, balancing enjoyment and
moderation. With this Ability, a person is able to have fun and gain
friends among the lower classes nearly anywhere, even among those of a
different culture. Specialties: power drinking, drinking songs, games of
chance, staying sober. (General)

**Charm:** Enticing, fascinating, and endearing others to you, but only
on a personal basis. It can be used to win someone over emotionally,
especially romantically. Specialties: courtly love, first impressions,
being witty. (General)

**Chirurgy (kie-RUHR-gee)\*:** This is Middle Ages-style surgery, used
to help others recover from physical damage. It encompasses tending and
binding wounds of all varieties, and the necessary but brutal skill of
cauterization. See page @@ for rules. Specialties: cauterization,
diagnosis, binding wounds, setting bones. (General)

**Civil and Canon Law\*:** Civil Law is the law of the Roman Empire.
Most local legal systems are based upon it (England being the notable
exception), and when a law is needed to govern international relations,
Civil Law is appealed to. The authority is Justinian\'s *Digest*. Canon
Law is the law of the Church. It is important to Mythic Europe as it
applies in all nations, governing the working of the church and some
other areas, such as marriage. It is important to note that members of
the clergy are only subject to Canon Law, not customary or Civil Law.
Most high churchmen are skilled canonists, not theologians. Canon Law is
made by Papal bulls (pronouncements), but the auctor is Gratian, in his
*Decretum*. This skill covers the knowledge of both types of law. Other
religions, particularly Judaism and Islam, have their own versions of
this Ability, which must be learned separately. Specialties: laws and
customs of a specific area, papal laws. (Academic)

**Code of Hermes\*:** Judging events according to the Code of Hermes and
the Peripheral Code. In addition to memorizing important precedents,
this knowledge includes the practical side of enforcing Hermetic law ---
for example, knowing when to push for a vote or how to present an
argument. Specialties: Wizards\' Marches, apprentices, mundane
relations, Tribunal procedures, political intrigue. (Arcane)

**Common Law\*:** Knowledge of the laws of England. There is no
authority for this Ability, and it is only taught in England.
Specialties: local laws, exchequer laws. (Academic)

**Concentration:** Focusing your mental faculties on one task,
particularly for extended periods of time. If you are attempting a feat
that demands your extra attention, or if you have just failed an action
and are trying again, the storyguide can call for a Concentration roll
before you can make the attempt. This Ability is especially important
for magi because it helps them maintain concentration on spells despite
distractions. Specialties: spell concentration, reading, lab work.
(General)

**Corpse Magic\*:** The character can use Corpse Magic to temporarily
revive a corpse. The target of this Supernatural Ability cannot have
received any burial rites from a Divinely-sanctioned religion, and the
corpse must be relatively intact, having as a minimum a spine, a skull,
and more than half of its long bones. There need not be any flesh
remaining. It takes fifteen minutes to chant the spells sufficiently to
awaken the dead.

**Casting Total: Communication + Corpse Magic + Aura modifier + stress
die**

**Commanding roll: Communication + Leadership + stress die; Leadership
may be limited by Language Ability**

Compare the result to the following Ease Factors to determine success:

**Ease Factor Outcome**

9 Speak to the dead. The corpse is not compelled to answer truthfully or
directly, although it may do so anyway.

12 Speak to the dead and compel it to speak truly.

Protect a corpse from being affected by further Corpse Magic. Any
attempt to do so has the Ease Factor increased by the Corpse Magic score
of the character.

15 Animate a corpse. Orders are followed to the best of the corpse\'s
abilities, but the character must remain in sight of the corpse else it
will cease all movement until he returns

Take control of an animated corpse. The Commanding roll must be greater
than the original animator\'s (if any), else the corpse continues to
follow its previous orders.

18 Animate a corpse and place it under the direct mental control of the
character; if he can see the corpse he can issue it orders. He can leave
the presence of the corpse and it will continue to obey its orders, but
once they are complete it remains motionless until given another order
by its creator.

The corpse animates and sits up, allowing the character converses with
it directly. A character who is particularly skilled can cause the
corpse to rise out of the grave and walk abroad. The character asks
questions or issues commands by making a Communication + Leadership
roll; the corpse does nothing unless commanded to do so using a roll of
this type. Single word commands have an Ease Factor of 6, simple
questions or commands require a 9, and more complex instructions or
questions need a 12 or more. The character must know the language that
the corpse spoke in life to ask it questions or issue commands. If the
character is not fluent in this language (that is, a score of 5 or
higher), then the character\'s Leadership is limited by his Language
Ability. Once the character has failed three commanding rolls, the
corpse sinks back into its grave or ceases movement, and cannot be
subject to Corpse Magic again until the moon has risen. All corpses are
also laid to rest if their heads are removed from their body.

Walking corpses typically have a Magic Might of 9 (see *Realms of Power:
Magic*, Chapter 6 for more details). The Penetration Total of the Corpse
Magic must exceed this Might to cause it to leave its grave, otherwise
it is confined to the earth.

**Specialities**: kings, soldiers, compelling truth, animating the dead.
(Supernatural)

**Craft (Type):** A general term for countless Abilities, all dealing
with handiwork of some type. In general, Craft Abilities are
distinguished by the material they work with, although you may also take
a Craft Ability that allows the character to work with several materials
in one specific way. You may purchase Craft more than once, choosing a
different one each time. Skill in one Craft does not imply skill in any
others. *City and* Guild contains more detailed information about Craft
Abilities and their use, in Chapter 4. Specialties: as appropriate to
the craft. (General)

**Crafter's Healing\*:** When using this Ability, each wound can only be
treated once, regardless of its severity. Make a Presence + Crafter's
Healing + stress die roll against an Ease Factor equal to the
Improvement Ease Factor determined by the Wound Recovery Table (page
@@). Healing a wound costs a Long-Term Fatigue level. If successful, the
wound is healed one level: heavy wounds become medium, medium wounds
light, and light wounds heal totally. If the roll fails, nothing happens
besides fatigue loss. If the roll botches, the healer suffers a similar
wound immediately. The wounded recipient gains a Warping Point each time
this Ability is used on her, regardless of its success. Specialties:
particular kinds of wounds. (Supernatural)

**Curse-Throwing\*:** This Supernatural Ability is usually aligned to
the Faerie Realm, but could be aligned to any supernatural realm. It
enables the character to heal diseases, remove curses, and dispel
detrimental magical effects, but only by transferring (or \'throwing\')
their effects to another person. Curse-Throwing cannot affect Flaws;
specifically, someone with the Lesser or Greater Malediction Flaw is
beyond the power of Curse-Throwing, unless it is a Flaw imposed by a
faerie or magician with a limited duration. However, any other curse
laid by a supernatural power is potentially within the remit of this
Ability; note that curses laid directly by God (such as leprosy) are
normally represented by permanent Flaws, and thus exempt. Only harmful
effects can be transferred with this Ability, and the storyguide is the
arbiter in cases where spells are not directly detrimental. Barrenness
is a common affliction treated by this power; if transferred to a man or
male animal then impotence is inflicted instead. Other curses
transferred to inappropriate targets are changed in a similar manner.

To throw a curse, the afflicted person must be physically present, and
the recipient of the curse must be represented either in person or by an
Arcane Connection. Afflictions can be passed from humans to animals or
vice versa, but this is harder than transferring within the same
species. Curse-Throwers sometimes transfer the curse to themselves, but
such altruism is rare. To throw a curse, the character must perform an
elaborate ritual which involves the crafting of a charm which transfers
the curse. This charm is a combination of a physical object and a chant.
The object is repeatedly touched to the target and the recipient (or the
Arcane Connection), whilst the chant is repeated over and over. The
ritual typically takes an hour for every 5 points (or fraction) of the
Ease Factor (see below). At the end of this time, the character
generates a Casting Total, which must equal or exceed the Ease Factor
listed below. If either the sufferer or the intended recipient of the
curse has Magic Resistance, the Penetration Total must exceed it, else
the curse stays where it is. A botched Curse-Throwing roll swaps the
recipient of the curse to the caster.

**Curse-Throwing Casting Total: Presence + Curse-Throwing + Aura +
stress die**

**Penetration Total: Casting Total -- Ease Factor + Penetration Bonus**

**Curse Ease Factor**

Minor Disease or Affliction\* 9

Serious Disease or Affliction\* 12

Major Disease or Affliction\* 15

Critical Disease \* 18

Spell 12 + magnitude of spell

Supernatural Ability 12 + Ability score

Power 12 + Might points spent

\*a Minor disease inflicts a Light wound, a Serious disease inflicts a
Medium wound, a Major disease inflicts a Heavy wound, and a Critical
disease inflicts an Incapacitating wound. See *Art & Academe*, Chapter
4: Medicine for more details. Minor Afflictions include boils and warts.
Serious Afflictions are equivalent to a Minor Flaw in magnitude, whereas
Major Afflictions are as severe as a Major Flaw.

**Situation Modifier to Casting Total**

Recipient present in person 0

Recipient represented by Arcane Connection lasting decades or more --1

Recipient represented by Arcane Connection lasting months or years --3

Recipient represented by Arcane Connection lasting weeks or less --6

Recipient is different species to target --3

Specialties: diseases, faerie curses, livestock. (Supernatural)

Example of Curse-Throwing

A young woman has failed to conceive despite four years of marriage, and
she and her mother visit Aelfred, the local faerie doctor. He explains
that her barrenness needs to be transferred to another, and the mother
volunteers, since she has already had three children. The Ease Factor
for this operation is 12, since barrenness is equivalent to a Minor
Flaw. The ritual takes three hours, at the end of which, Aelfred
generates a Casting Total: 2 (Presence) + 5 (Curse-Throwing) + 5 (stress
die) + 2 (Faerie aura of Aelfred\'s home), for a total of 14. However,
unbeknownst to the characters the barrenness was caused by the curse of
a local witch. Her Hex Ability score was 5, thus the Ease Factor was
actually 17 (12 + Hex 5). Since Aelfred\'s player succeeds in an
Intelligence + Faerie Lore roll, the storyguide informs him that Aelfred
suspects that his Curse-Throwing should have worked if the barrenness
was natural. Aelfred counsels the mother and daughter to investigate
whether they have any enemies with supernatural powers.

**(Dead Language)\*:** This skill is similar to all other (Language)
Abilities, but it is only available to educated characters. It grants
the ability to speak a language which is no longer used as a native
language in the areas the character has lived in. The most important
example is Latin. All educated characters in the West know Latin, since
without it you cannot learn any Academic Knowledges. It is also the
common language of the Church and Order of Hermes. In other areas of the
world, Arabic, Greek and Hebrew fill similar functions, although of
these only Hebrew is a dead language. Specialties: academic usage,
Church ceremonies, Hermetic usage. (Academic)

**Dominion Lore\*:** Knowledge of the manifestations of the power of the
Divine. Different from Church Lore (a kind of (Organization) Lore))
because it covers miracles rather than politics, and different from
Theology because it is concerned with power rather than doctrine.
Specialties: angels, saints, Divine creatures. (Arcane)

**Dowsing\*:** You have the ability to find things nearby through the
use of a dowsing rod (usually a forked stick) and your own intuitive
sense. You concentrate on the thing to be found, hold your dowsing rod
out in front of you, and follow its subtle motions to the target. If
you\'re looking for something specific, you must have an appropriate
sympathetic connection to the thing sought (such as bottled water from a
stream when searching for running water). Before you roll, designate the
area in which you are searching --- if the item sought is not present in
that area, you automatically fail. The time required to search depends
on the size of the area, and must be invested whether you succeed or
not. It takes about one Diameter (two minutes, or twenty combat rounds)
to search for something within 25 paces, and doubling the distance
quadruples the time. To find something common, like water, within 25
paces requires a Perception + Dowsing of 9+. Increased distances or
dowsing for less common things increases the target number, so that, for
example, finding gold within 100 paces would have an Ease Factor of 15.
Specialties: searching for a particular kind of thing (water, gold,
etc.), searching in a particular kind of place. (Supernatural)

**Embitterment\*:** You can cause one person to hate another. This
Ability is described in the Hermetic Magic chapter, page @@.

**Enchanting (Ability)\*:** When you set your mind to it, you can
influence others with a particular performance ability. For a specific
effect, you must use words that people can understand. You can calm the
grieving with tunes alone, but you need lyrics to convince peasants to
rise up against the local lord. General effects work on animals, but
specific effects only work on creatures that can understand words. When
you use Enchanting Ability, roll a die (stress or simple, depending on
the situation) and add Communication and Enchanting Ability. An Ease
Factor of 9 will calm the upset, 12 will win someone\'s love, 15 will
incite a riot, and a 24 might win back a soul from the Prince of
Darkness. If you botch, you inspire an unwanted emotion.

If the target has Magic Resistance, you must penetrate their resistance;
see page @@ for rules.

You should also roll for the quality of the performance, but the magical
effect is independent of this, unless you botch. If you do botch the
Ability roll, you have failed to produce any performance for some
reason, and so the Supernatural Ability automatically fails.
Specialties: a particular emotion, a particular sort of person.
(Supernatural)

**Enigmatic Wisdom\*:** The understanding that Criamon magi have of the
Enigma. It is described in the Hermetic Magic chapter, on page @@.
(Arcane)

**Entrancement\*:** You have the power to control another\'s will. By
staring deeply into someone\'s eyes for several seconds --- generally
impossible in combat --- you can verbally command the person to perform
a certain task. Roll Presence + Entrancement against the target\'s
Stamina roll. The person being controlled may get a bonus to resist at
the option of the storyguide, according to the table below. Hermetic
magi get their normal Mentem Magic Resistance, and get the normal
Stamina roll if the effect penetrates. The blind, and people with their
eyes closed, are immune; see page @@ for more guidelines on making eye
contact. However, it is not possible to look away while being Entranced
unless you win the opposed roll.

**Command Example Victim\'s Bonus**

Innocuous Talk to me +3

Questionable Meet me alone at night +6

Dangerous Put your weapons away +9

Heinous Kill your fellows +12

Suicidal Jump off a cliff +15

Specialties: A specific sort of command, a specific sort of person.
(Supernatural)

**Etiquette:** You know the social graces and how to behave in different
situations. Etiquette differs from Charm in that Etiquette covers proper
behavior, rather than charming behavior. You cannot seduce someone with
Etiquette, but neither can you get through an audience with the bishop
on Charm alone. Specialties: nobility, court, peasants, faeries, the
Church. (General)

**Faerie Lore\*:** Familiarity with faerie powers, weaknesses,
motivations, and areas. Specialties: faerie forests, faerie mounds,
specific types of faeries. (Arcane)

**Faerie Magic\*:** The connection to the power of the Faerie realm
possessed by Merinita magi. It cannot be learned by other characters,
even if they have access to Arcane Abilities. It is described in the
Hermetic Magic chapter, on page @@. (Arcane)

**Finesse:** Manipulating your spells and performing special feats with
them. You would use this Ability to position objects delicately or to
target spells. Specialties: grace, precision, any one Form. (Arcane)

**Folk Ken:** Understanding the background, personality, and motives of
another person. Often the storyguide secretly rolls a die when this
Ability is used. Thus, you do not know if your character guessed
correctly, or even botched. Specialties: peasants, townsfolk, nobles,
clergy, magi, the opposite sex. (General)

**Font of Knowledge\*:** By succeeding in an Ability check
(Intelligence + Font of Knowledge + stress die) against an Ease Factor
of (6 plus (3 times number of uses of Font of Knowledge that day)) a
creature with this Ability may attempt a task with any untrained ability
as if they possessed a score of 2. Failed attempts count towards the
number of uses in a given day. Specialties: a particular topic.
(Supernatural)

**Great Weapon:** Fighting with a weapon which requires two hands to
use. Specialties: any one weapon. (Martial)

**Guile:** Telling convincing lies, as well as feigning emotion, belief,
or frame of mind. If you understand the person you are attempting to
deceive (roll 9+ on Perception + Folk Ken), you gain a bonus of +1 to
your Guile roll. This Ability also covers disguising yourself, and
pretending to be something you are not. It is often an opposed roll,
against the victim\'s Perception + Folk Ken or, for disguise,
Perception + Awareness. Specialties: particular sorts of deception,
lying to authority, fast talk, elaborate lies. (General)

**Heartbeast\*:** The ability shared by all Bjornaer magi to take the
form of their heartbeast. It is described in the Hermetic Magic chapter,
on page @@. This Ability cannot be learned by non-Bjornaer characters,
even if they have access to Arcane Abilities. (Arcane)

**Hex\*:** The character has the power to bring about injury or ruin
upon her enemies. There are three ways for her to activate this power:
by making eye contact with her victim and proclaiming her purpose loud
enough for him to hear, by tracing temporary occult signs and symbols on
her target that indicate the dark fate she intends, or by acquiring an
Arcane Connection to her target and fashioning a recognizable
representation that can channel the effect through sympathetic magic.

To hex a target, the character must make clear her will for it: she must
declare her wishes to the victim aloud, or indicate the specifics of the
hex in writing on or very near the target, or do something to the
representation that is similar to what she intends to happen to the
target. There is always a physical component to the hex (common
practices include tying knots in a line, spitting, or giving the target
the \"evil eye\").

You must also state a time frame for the hex, anywhere from an effect
that occurs immediately to a hex that will affect the third generation
of the victim\'s descendants. Generally speaking, the sooner the effect
manifests, the less potent it will be; and the longer the hex delays,
the more powerful it will eventually become. For this reason you must
always apply the delay modifier (see the sidebar) to the Hex total.

Hex Delay Modifiers

**Delay Modifier**

moment --12

hour --9

day --6

week --3

month 0

season +3

year +6

generation +9

lifetime +12

When you have framed the hex appropriately, roll Intelligence + Hex +
aura bonus + the delay modifier and compare this to the Ease Factor on
the Hex Effects chart. The severity of these effects is comparable to
the effects of botching a roll with a specific number of 0s on the botch
dice, as noted below. If you should botch the Hex roll, the hex may
still happen, but with unpredictable and unintended results, possibly
affecting the character or someone close to her instead. Or, she may
suffer Warping Points, fatigue loss, or other unfortunate effects.

**Hex: stress die + Intelligence + Hex + Aura bonus + modifiers**

Hex Effects

**Ease Factor Severity Example**

6+ Minor (1 botch) Automatic failure at an important task

12+ Serious (2 botches) Struck blind

18+ Major (3 botches) Debilitating illness

24+ Critical (4 botches) All Characteristics reduced by 3

30+ Terminal (5 botches) Sudden death

A potential victim can avoid the effects of a hex by seeking out
supernatural protection of some sort, usually from the Divine. If a
character receives absolution in a religious ceremony, all hexes that
have targeted him are permanently undone. Characters can also remove
hexes with other supernatural effects, such as a Perdo Vim spell, a
faerie blessing, or a holy miracle. Treat the hex as having a spell
level equal to the number of botch dice it approximates, multiplied by
10, so that a Serious hex is a level 20 effect, and a Critical hex is
level 40.

Hex is often a false power (as the False Power Flaw) associated with the
Magical or Faerie realms. That is, it often uses the Magical or Faerie
column of the realm interaction chart, but appears as an unholy power
when subjected to divine or infernal powers of investigation. Purely
Infernal versions of the power also exist, as do Magical or Faerie
versions that are not touched by the Infernal. Such \"pure\" versions of
Hex are rare, however, as demons love to taint this power. Specialties:
A specific duration, one method of hexing, a particular effect.
(Supernatural)

**Hunt:** Setting snares, choosing appropriate hunting spots, and
following and identifying the spoor of creatures of all varieties. This
Ability also lets you cover your tracks or not leave any in the first
place. Specialties: tracking, covering tracks, hunting a specific
animal. (General)

**Induction\*:** This is the supernatural ability to create illusions in
a person's mind. Only the target can see those illusions. Each attempt
at induction requires the inducer to talk with the victim for at least
one minute. Characters who cannot hear the inducer are immune to his
powers.

Attempts at induction require a die roll of Communication + Induction.
Induction is not made more difficult by the complexity of the illusion:
it is made more difficult as the risk the victim takes by believing the
illusion increases. On some level the victim is aware of the real world,
and can snap out of the induced state if threatened.

The Ease Factors for Induction are:

Innocuous 3

Potentially Shaming 6

Potentially Dangerous to Others 9

Potentially Dangerous to Self 12

Potentially Suicidal 15

**Roll Modifiers (pick only one)**

Victim is drunk, drugged, exhausted, or critically ill +3

Victim knows and trusts the inducer +3

Site of induction has been carefully prepared with expensive props, in
advance +3.

If an Inducer has successfully snared a victim, the Inducer may roll
again to try and bump the effect up to the next level of risk. This
requires at least fifteen minutes, and on the second roll, the Ease
Factor is reduced by 3. An inducer can take a great deal of time, and
several rolls, to work a victim up through the levels of danger to
potentially suicidal.

A victim of induction realizes afterwards that they have been affected
by magic if the roll above does not exceed the Ease Factor by (6 -- 1
per factor from the list below).

This value can be reduced by 1 by each of the following factors: choose
no more than 3.

Careful use of props (clothes stained, souvenirs provided)

Illusion includes brush off (character in illusion returns character
home, character falls asleep inside illusion and wakes up in bed)

No lost time (character in illusion explains it is all happening in one
night, no servants notice the character gone)

Real world effects (character\'s actions in illusion seem to have
altered the real world in verifiable ways)

Follow up (the character has been convinced previous illusions were
real, and this one is part of that larger story).

Specialties: particular kinds of illusion. (Supernatural)

Entrancement and Induction

Entrancement and Induction appear similar, because they have a similar
scale of Ease factors, but they differ in practice. Entrancement takes
control of a character\'s will, and dictates their actions, but does not
affect what they believe or experience. Induction causes a character to
sense things which are not real, and may convince them of things which
are not true, but does not force them to act.

It is possible for characters to have both Entrancement and Induction,
and to use each to bolster the other. For example, \"Speak to me\" is an
innocuous Entrancement, which allows Induction to begin. Inductions that
convince a character that something is less risky, or more necessary,
than it truly is alter the Ease Factors for Entrancement.

**Infernal Lore\*:** An understanding and familiarity with the Infernal
and its agents. Includes knowledge of demons and their habits and
weaknesses, undead and their habits and weaknesses, and the power of
curses. Specialties: demons, undead, curses. (Arcane)

**Intrigue:** Dealing and plotting, including subtle use of power in
non-confrontational ways to achieve your own ends. Intrigue need not be
underhanded or manipulative --- it also covers negotiations and
knowledge of formal and informal rules of conduct and politeness. In
addition, Intrigue also allows a character to pick up important
information about those in power, separating fact from useless gossip.
Intrigue is a vital talent for those who frequent court or a Hermetic
Tribunal. Specialties: gossip, plotting, rumormongering, alliances.
(General)

**Islamic Law\*:** This is the Muslim version of Civil & Canon Law. The
major sources of Islamic Law are the Qur'an and the Sunna. Specialties:
any one of the sources of Islamic Law, particular topics, customs of a
particular area. (Academic)

**Judaic Lore:** Judaic Lore is the knowledge of Jewish cultural
practice as opposed to strictly religious details. This includes poetry,
folklore, songs, and so on. All Jewish characters are versed in Judaic
Lore to some degree and experience points in this Ability at character
creation can be part of their childhood abilities. Specialties:
folklore, music, poetry, songs (General)

**Leadership:** Getting people to obey your orders and to follow you.
Can also be used to inspire fear in others, cowing them into submission.
Specialties: intimidation, in combat, inspiration. (General)

**Legerdemain\*:** Sleight of hand and knowledge of confidence games
requiring sleight of hand. It requires a delicate touch and great
hand-eye coordination. Legerdemain includes filching things from market
stalls, cutting purses, and picking such locks as there are, as well as
the \"magical\" trickery often used to raise money from credulous folk.
The target of an attempt rolls Perception + Awareness to detect your
actions. If the perceiver has Legerdemain skill, he may substitute that
for Awareness if he wishes. On particularly delicate moves such as
picking pockets, someone trying to spot the character using Legerdemain
receives a +3 bonus. Specialties: filching, picking pockets, \"magic\"
tricks. (General)

**(Living Language)\*:** Fluency in a particular living language. Rather
than a die roll modifier, your score in this Knowledge measures your
ability to communicate.

Score Fluency

0 Point and grunt. With one or more experience points, you know
\'please\', \'thank you\', and a few other words.

1 Basic questions and answers: \'Where is the church?\', \'Do you sell
food?\'. Constant mistakes, and an atrocious accent. People must speak
slowly and often repeat themselves, and you cannot string a conversation
together.

2 Basic conversation. You can sustain a short conversation on a common
topic. You still make many mistakes, and often fail to catch what others
say.

3 Haltingly functional. You can hold a conversation on everyday topics,
although it takes time, you make many mistakes, and your accent is still
bad.

4 Functional. You can hold a conversation on non-technical topics, and
make few mistakes. People do not normally need to repeat themselves.
This is the minimum level required to study from a book.

5 Fluent. You still have an accent if this is not your native language,
but it is weak. You speak as well as most natives. This is the minimum
level required to write a book.

6 Elegant. You choose your words well, and have no accent if this is not
your native language.

When two people speak to each other, the lower Ability score determines
how well they communicate. Characters who speak related languages can
communicate at a penalty to their scores (assigned by the storyguide)
depending on how closely related the two languages are. Two dialects of
the same language generally have a --1 penalty. If your character is not
specialized in a dialect, you should specify a dialect without
specializing in it, and take the penalty when conversing with people who
speak a different dialect. If you speak a \"standard\" version of the
language, that is a dialect that differs from all other dialects.

Note that Latin and Hebrew are not living languages in most of Mythic
Europe. However, characters who live in places where they are (such as
some covenants) may learn this Ability without any special Virtues. The
same is true of all languages that are learned as dead languages in one
area, but still living languages in another.

Characters with this Ability are illiterate unless they also have a
score in Artes Liberales (page @@).

This Ability also covers artistic compositions in the language, and
telling existing tales with verve and passion. Knowledge of stories is
covered by the appropriate Lore Abilities. Specialties: poetry, prose,
specific dialects, expansive vocabulary, specific technical vocabulary,
slang, storytelling. (General)

**Magic Lore\*:** Knowledge of magical creatures, areas, and traditions.
Specialties: creatures, magical traditions, regiones. (Arcane)

**Magic Sensitivity\*:** You are often able to identify a place or
object as magical. However, your sensitivity makes you more susceptible
to magical effects: subtract your Magic Sensitivity score from your
Magic Resistance. When attempting to sense the magic nature of a place
or object, the storyguide will assign an Ease Factor-simply roll a
simple die + Perception + Magic Sensitivity.

Detecting a Magic aura would normally have an Ease Factor equal to 12 --
aura level, so 9 for a level 3 aura and 6 for a level 6 aura.

For spells and enchanted items, an Ease Factor equal to 21 -- magnitude
of effect is a good guide. For enchanted items, use the magnitude of the
most powerful effect in the item.

For magical creatures, 15 -- one fifth of the creature\'s Magic Might is
appropriate, so for a creature with a Magic Might of 25, the Ease Factor
would be 10.

Specialties: auras, magical creatures, enchanted items, active spells.
(Supernatural)

**Magic Theory\*:** Knowledge of what magic is and how it works, used
primarily in the laboratory. Magic Theory deals with the technical
details of Hermetic magic; Magic Lore covers knowledge of magical things
in general. Anyone can learn Magic Theory, if they have access to a
teacher or book (normally represented by a Virtue), but it is little use
to those without The Gift. Specialties: inventing spells, enchanting
items, a single Art. (Arcane)

**Medicine\*:** Medicine is the formal study of the body and its
diseases. Medical practice is based on the theory of the four humors:
blood, phlegm, yellow bile, and black bile. Diseases are often caused by
imbalances among them, hence such practices as bloodletting, to restore
the balance. Medicine also deals with treating poisons and the results
of starvation and the like, but not with treating wounds (see Chirurgy,
above). The auctores are Galen and Hippocrates, in many works. It is
important to note that medieval medical theory is basically true in
Mythic Europe. Specialties: anatomy, apothecary, physician. (Academic)

**Music:** The ability to sing, play musical instruments, and compose
new music. Specialties: sing, compose, any one instrument. (General)

**(Mystery Cult) Lore\*:** This is the (Organization) Lore of a
particular cult. It provides knowledge of the legends, history,
structure, operation and goals of the Mystery Cult in question.

It includes knowledge of the magics, rites and secret passwords and
symbolism of the cult, how to covertly signal membership, and how to
assess another magus\'s membership or non-membership in your cult. Two
magi with a score in this ability for the same Mystery Cult may well be
able to hold a seemingly innocuous conversation without outsiders
understanding the true significance or meaning of their words. Many
Mystery Cult specialty books also require a score in this ability to
decode their heavy symbolism; this method is used to prevent
un-Initiated outsiders learning secrets of the Mystery.

Mystery Cult Lore also covers the ceremonies of the cult, frequently
enacted whenever the cult gathers formally. It is also a key knowledge
for a Mystagogue\'s performance of the Initiation Rites, to guide the
Initiate through the path of Ordeals, ceremony and meditation, to gain
new Virtues.

Cult Lore is passed from Mystagogue to Initiate, from Mystae to Mystae
in a chain of living secrets. Some cults also write down their secret
lores, as this codifies the Mystery and lets others share the same view
of the cult --- others prefer the secrecy of the Oral Tradition. Small
cults may fade away from lack of members, especially if they are
persecuted at some point --- but if they committed some of their Lore to
writing, the cult may be re-born by those who discover and understand
the texts. Some cults risk the loss of secrecy for this very reason ---
that their secrets and magical rites may not be lost forever. Some magi
search for lost texts, containing secret lores of the Ancients, hoping
to re-enact the rites and rituals that led the Ancients to power.

In game terms, Experience points in Cult Lore are acquired like any
other knowledge --- including Teaching, Books, Practice and Exposure.
Learning Cult Lore from another ensures that master and pupil share the
same rites; learning by yourself generally implies that you have devised
your own variant (even \"deviant\") rites and rituals --- from such
disagreements schisms arise and cults may break up and fragment.

A magus may build the knowledge from 0, even without instruction --- but
this means they have devised their own cult, and should treat their Lore
as a new Lore. (General)

**(Organization) Lore\*:** Knowledge of the legends, history, structure,
operation, and goals of the specified organization. Organizations can be
as large as the Church, or as small as a local craft guild. The smaller
the organization, the more detailed your knowledge. Order of Hermes Lore
is particularly important to most magi. Specialties: personalities,
history, politics. (General)

**Parma Magica\*:** Protection from magic. This is a special ritual (not
a ritual spell) that takes about two minutes to perform. It lets you add
5 times your Parma Magica score to your Magic Resistance until the next
sunrise or sunset, whichever comes first. You may suppress your Parma
Magica temporarily by concentrating; this is equivalent to sustaining a
Concentration duration spell. (See page @@). Parma Magica does not
require concentration while it is active.

You may also protect one other person for each point in Parma Magica,
with their consent. You must touch each person to start the protection,
and it lasts as long as at least one character can see the other. The
magus may cancel the protection at will, at any distance. While a magus
is protecting others, his effective Parma Magica score is reduced by 3
points, both for himself and for the other people he is protecting. If
the magus has a Parma Magica score of 3 or lower, his Parma Magica
provides each character, including himself, with a Magic Resistance of
0. In the magus\'s case, this is added to his Form resistance, and a
magus protected by another magus\'s Parma Magica may also add his Form
resistance.

Any character protected by a Parma Magica, whether their own or someone
else's, is unaffected by the social penalties of other people's Gifts.
If a protected character is Gifted, their Gift still imposes social
penalties on others, unless those others are also protected by a Parma
Magica, or are unaffected by The Gift for some other reason.

Parma Magica can only be learned by Gifted characters, although they
learn it as a normal Arcane Ability, not a Supernatural Ability. It is
only known by Hermetic magi, as the Order enforces the \'Join or Die\'
choice rigorously on anyone who knows it, as well as declaring a
Wizard\'s March on the magus who taught it. Parma Magica is the last
thing an apprentice learns, being taught the final key to the Ability
after he swears the Oath. Specialties: protection from any specific
Form. (Arcane)

**Penetration:** Getting your spell through the target\'s Magic
Resistance. See page @@ for full Penetration rules. Specialties: any one
Art. (Arcane)

**Persona\*:** The character with this Ability can alter his appearance
to adopt a different identity. He can alter any aspect of his
appearance: hair and eye color, complexion, shape of nose, build and
height (within the limits of his Size), apparent age, and even gender.
These changes are total, proof even to the most intimate mundane
scrutiny, but do not change the character's essential nature.
Consequently, all Characteristic scores remain unchanged, Virtues and
Flaws are transferred to all new forms, and a character who does not
normally have a womb cannot become pregnant when adopting the persona of
a someone who does.

Adopting a different identity requires one round of concentration and a
roll of Stamina + Persona against an Ease Factor of 9. Changing back to
the character's natural form requires the same concentration and the
same roll. Each identity has its own Personality Traits and behavioral
quirks, and no Disguise roll is necessary to convince others of the
role; this is not a disguise but a whole different person.

The character gains one identity for every point he has in the Persona
Ability. Every time the Ability increases by one point, the character
must design a new identity. Specialties: priests, peasants, magi
(Supernatural)

**Philosophiae\*:** There are three philosophies --- natural philosophy,
moral philosophy, and metaphysics. Aristotle is the auctor for all of
them, in different books. Most scholars study the philosophies after the
Arts but before going on to Law, Theology or Medicine. Natural
philosophy is the study of the sub-lunar world. It roughly corresponds
to today\'s science. The main texts are the *Physica*, *De
Meteorologia*, and *De historia animalium*. Moral philosophy is the
study of the proper way of human life. It covers ethics, politics, and
economics --- the texts are the *Ethica*, *Politica*, and *Economica*.
Metaphysics is the philosophy of the fundamental nature of the world.
The main text is Aristotle\'s *Metaphysica*. The theories of the
Philosophiae are all basically correct in Mythic Europe. Specialties:
natural philosophy, moral philosophy, metaphysics, Ritual magic,
Ceremonial magic. (Academic)

**Premonitions\*:** You intuitively sense whenever something is wrong,
or is likely to go wrong soon. This Ability can be called upon by you or
the storyguide, as appropriate, whenever there is a chance to avoid
danger. Roll Perception + Premonitions against an Ease Factor depending
on the situation. The Ease Factor starts at 3 for imminent, mortal
peril, and increases as the distance in time increases and the level of
danger decreases. Mortal peril a week in the future would have an Ease
Factor of 9, while an imminent minor inconvenience would have an Ease
Factor of about 15. If you beat the Ease Factor by 3 or more, you also
get some sense of the nature of the danger, with more detail if you roll
more highly. Specialties: threats to a particular person or group of
people, particular kinds of threats. (Supernatural)

**Profession (Type):** The ability to do a job which does not involve
making something. Examples include jongleur, marshal, reeve, sailor,
steward, teamster, and washerwoman. Specialties depend on the
profession. (General)

**Rabbinic Law\*:** This is the Jewish version of Civil & Canon Law. The
major sources of Rabbinic Law are the Talmud, the Oral Torah, and the
Responsa of the Geonim. Specialties: any one of the sources of Rabbinic
Law, dietary laws, particular topics, precedents of a given area
(Academic)

**Ride:** Riding and controlling a riding animal, especially under
stress. Specialties: battle, speed, tricks. (General)

**Second Sight\*:** You are able to see through illusionary concealment
and disguise, including invisibility, and can also see naturally
invisible things such as spirits and the boundaries between regio levels
(see page @@). The Ease Factor to see through illusionary concealment is
normally equal to 6 + the magnitude of the might of the creature
responsible for the effect, or 6 + the magnitude of a Hermetic spell. In
general, this Virtue allows you to see through Hermetic concealment
effected with Imaginem, but not other Forms. The Magic Resistance, if
any, of the concealed creature does not interfere with your Second
Sight. If something is actually transformed, for example by a MuCo
spell, you cannot determine the genuine form. The Ease Factor to see a
naturally invisible thing is normally 9, and the Ease Factor for seeing
regio levels is specified on page @@. All Second Sight rolls are
Perception + Second Sight, and they are almost always simple rolls.
Specialties: regiones, invisible things, illusory disguises, faeries,
ghosts. (Supernatural)

**Sense Holiness and Unholiness\*:** You are able to feel the presence
of good and evil. A Perception + Sense Holiness and Unholiness roll
against an Ease Factor of 9 lets you sense holiness or unholiness in a
general area; against an Ease Factor of 15, in a person or object. The
Ease Factor to detect a demon is 0, but the character must still
Penetrate its Magic Resistance. If an angel is hiding its divine nature,
which is unusual, the Ease Factor is 15, and the character must
Penetrate. If the angel is not hiding its divine nature, the roll
automatically succeeds. In auras of particularly strong divine or
infernal influence, your sensitivity may overwhelm you. This Ability is
granted by the Divine realm, not the Magic or Faerie realms, and thus
uses the Divine column of the realm interaction chart (page @@).
Specialties: good or evil. (Supernatural)

**Sense Passions\*:** The character can sense the personality and
desires of an intelligent being by recognizing and identifying the
different shades of tarnish on its soul. A Perception + Sense Passions
roll against an Ease Factor of 9 lets her sense the most powerful
emotion currently being experienced by the person, and a roll against an
Ease Factor of 15 allows her to identify the character\'s most dominant
Personality Trait. The effect must penetrate the target\'s Magic
Resistance if it has any kind of supernatural protection, and since this
is a Supernatural Ability, it is affected by auras.

**Sense Passions: stress die + Perception + Sense Passions + Aura**

Through careful examination, the character can also recognize passions
in people within the general area, allowing her to hone in on the most
powerful source of emotion within sight, usually the character with the
highest (or lowest) Personality Trait. This requires a 12 or better on
the Sense Passions roll.

The character can also tell when an aura has a tarnish (se *Realms of
Power: The Infernal,* page 13*)* or temper (see *Realms of Power: The
Divine Revised Edition*, page 38) and its type or types by overcoming an
Ease Factor of 6.

By sensing passions, the character can often recognize incorporeal
spirits. You may treat Sense Passions as Second Sight when attempting to
recognize the presence of invisible or bodiless beings. However, this
does not allow her to see through illusions, even illusions of strong
emotions, and she cannot actually see the spirits, merely sense their
proximity.

In addition, this Ability allows the character to Sense Holiness and
Unholiness in a limited fashion, much like the Sense Holiness and
Unholiness Ability. She can tell that something is either holy or
unholy, but she cannot distinguish between the two. She feels the
emotional presence associated with the Divine or the Infernal, but
cannot pinpoint its supernatural origin. Thus, she might mistake a demon
with a fair shape for an angel, or a fearsome-looking angel for a demon.
By identifying the target\'s primary emotions or desires, however, you
can usually get a good idea of which realm the target is associated
with, assuming the character can penetrate its Magic Resistance.

Sense Passions is either a false power (see the False Power Flaw), or is
associated with the Infernal. This means that it always appears infernal
to divine or infernal detection. The presence of Infernal taint allows
the Sense Holiness and Unholiness aspect to work. If the troupe allows
Divine powers to be false, this may be the false version of Sense
Holiness and Unholiness. Specialties: auras, emotions, Personality
Traits, in a general area. (Supernatural)

**Shapeshifter\*:** You may change your shape into that of a mundane
animal from the size of a robin (--10) to that of a bear (+2). This
requires a few seconds\' (one round\'s) concentration, and a roll of
Stamina + Shapeshifter against an Ease Factor of 9. Changing back to
human form requires the same concentration, and the same roll.

You have a limited repertoire of shapes, one for every point you have in
the Shapeshift ability. Every time you raise the Ability by one point,
you may choose a new shape.

Specialties: One of your shapes, particular conditions for the change.
(Supernatural)

**Single Weapon:** Fighting with a weapon used in one hand, possibly
using a shield with the other. This includes lances used as intended
from horseback. Specialties: any one weapon or shield, which covers
using that weapon with any shield or none, and that shield with any
weapon. (Martial)

**Stealth:** Sneaking about without being seen or heard, also hiding in
one place. This includes following people without their noticing, which
is rolled against the other person\'s Perception. Specialties: hide,
sneak, shadowing, urban areas, natural areas. (General)

**Summon Animals\*:** You can summon animals. This Ability is described
in the Hermetic Magic chapter, on page @@.

**Survival:** Finding food, water, shelter, a direct route, and relative
safety in the wilderness (a very dangerous place in Mythic Europe). This
Ability covers such mundane tasks as building a fire and cooking food
without implements. Specialties: specific locales. (General)

**Swim:** The ability to propel yourself through water quickly and
efficiently. Specialties: long distances, diving, underwater
maneuvering. (General)

**Teaching:** The ability to teach an Ability to someone else.
Specialties: a particular Ability, particular kinds of student.
(General)

**Theology: Christian\*:** Theology is the study of God and his work in
the world. The auctores are the Bible and Peter the Lombard\'s
*Sententiae*, the Bible having theoretical primacy, being infallible,
and the Sentences being most studied. The speculations of theology are
very abstruse, and many theologians are accused of heresy. Sometimes
those accused recant, and sometimes they convince the Church that they
were right after all. Specialties: biblical knowledge, heresy, history.
(Academic)

**Theology: Islam\***: This is the Islamic equivalent of Theology:
Christian. The major sources for Islamic theology are the Qur'an and the
Sunna. Specialties: the Qur'an, debates, history, prophets. (Academic)

**Theology: Judaism\*:** This is the Jewish equivalent of Theology:
Christian. The major sources for Jewish theology are the Torah, the
Nevi\'im, and the Kutuvim. Specialties: the Torah, creation, history,
prophecies (Academic)

**Thrown Weapon:** Fighting at range using weapons which are thrown.
Specialties: any one weapon. (Martial)

**Whistle Up The Wind\*:** You can create wind by whistling. This
Ability is described in the Hermetic Magic chapter, on page @@.

**Wilderness Sense\*:** You are mystically attuned to the ways of the
wilderness. A Perception + Wilderness Sense roll against an Ease Factor
of 9 lets you determine the direction of north, the upcoming weather, or
the presence of natural hazards or resources. One roll will only reveal
one piece of information. Specialties: direction, weather, hazards,
resources. (Supernatural)
