Hermetic Magic

In the 8th century the wizard Bonisagus developed a universal theory of
magic and the Order of Hermes was born. The most immediate advantage of
Hermetic magic was that it allowed wizards of diverse magical
backgrounds to share their knowledge. Before Bonisagus\' theory, the
practice of magic had been highly individualized and therefore limited
in scope. With the ability to share and accumulate knowledge, Hermetic
magi gained an immense advantage over other wizards. This universal
theory is not without its disadvantages, however. Detractors of the
system believe that the strict regimentation of Hermetic magic robs
truly brilliant magi of the chance to discover the modes of magic power
that best suit them, and that it is truly helpful only to mediocre magi
who need an exact system to guide them.

The Order of Hermes is only a part of the greater magical world. There
exist non-Hermetic magi from European traditions, and from further
afield. Be this as it may, the rules presented here cover Hermetic magic
only. *Hedge Magic, Revised Edition, Rival Magic, The Cradle and the
Crescent, Between Sand and Sea, Lands of the Nile* and the *Realms of
Power* sourcebooks provide rules for many non-Hermetic traditions.
Storyguides should also feel free to create non-Hermetic magic that
governs monsters, wizards, and magic items that do not fit the paradigm
set out in these rules, and thus keep magic a mystery even to those who
think they know it all.

Hermetic magic is a highly useful but not entirely perfect theory. These
rules reflect the things that magi expect to happen when they work with
magic. While the expected usually occurs, the exact effects of magic can
be influenced by countless factors, including such vagaries as the phase
of the moon, the spiritual nature of the target, and the mental state of
the caster. This allows storyguides to occasionally bend the rules and
interpret magical effects imaginatively.

The Gift

The capacity to work magic is known as The Gift among Hermetic magi.
Only people with The Gift can be taught Hermetic magic, but not all of
them learn it. Many Hermetic magi say that people with minor mystical
abilities have a partial Gift, but it is not clear that the source of
their power is the same as that of magi. People with The Gift may be
taught non-Hermetic magic instead, but it is almost impossible for one
person to learn two kinds of magic. (See page @@ for the rules for
this.)

The Gift is very rare, appearing in perhaps one person in a few
thousand. Magi have many theories as to the cause of The Gift, but none
of these are generally accepted.

The Gift has a strong emotional effect on those around the Gifted
person, making them suspicious and mistrustful of the Gifted individual,
inspiring envy. As a result, social interactions are very difficult for
the Gifted. Some Hermetic magi have the Gentle Gift (a Virtue, see page
@@), which does not affect people in this way, while others have the
Blatant Gift (a Flaw, see page @@), which has much more intense effects.
The Gift also bothers mundane animals, which avoid the Gifted individual
as far as possible. The Gift only affects those in the presence of the
Gifted individual. Letters from a Gifted individual do not have this
effect, nor does a messenger from such an individual, unless the
messenger himself has The Gift.

When roleplaying a character dealing with a maga, have him act as though
she has a well-established reputation for dishonesty and unreliability,
and for undeserved privilege of whatever sort is most important to him.
Thus, a merchant acts as if he believes that a maga is wealthy through
cheating people, while a lord acts as if he believes that the maga is a
treacherous vassal who retains her position through bribery or similar.
If the maga tries to overcome this reaction through negotiation, she
suffers a --3 penalty to any die rolls she must make. Someone without
The Gift negotiating on her behalf does not suffer the penalty, but must
deal with the mistrust inspired by The Gift. If the maga manages to
convince or coerce someone into interacting with her, she suffers the
--3 penalty to all rolls and totals based on social interaction,
including training, whether the maga is the trainer or the trainee.

The Blatant Gift has a more intense effect. Treat the Blatantly Gifted
character as having a well-established reputation for dishonesty and
treachery of a dangerous kind, as well as for the possession of
ill-gotten gains. People interacting with a Blatantly Gifted maga are
extremely wary and rather hostile. Animals treat her as a threat to be
driven away from their territory. If the maga tries to overcome this
reaction through negotiation, she suffers a --6 penalty to any die rolls
she must make. An unGifted individual negotiating on her behalf suffers
no penalty, but must overcome the hostility. If a maga with Blatant Gift
interacts with someone, she suffers the --6 penalty to all social rolls
and totals, as for the normal Gift.

Note that those interacting with Gifted people do not actually think
that they have a bad reputation; that is merely an analogy to help you
to work out how they would react.

The Gift only has its effects if the maga comes to the attention of
someone, just like a reputation. If a Gifted maga dresses
unostentatiously, keeps to the middle of the group, does not appear to
be the leader, and doesn\'t talk to anyone, then the group *should* be
able to travel without suffering from people\'s reactions to The Gift,
as long as the maga behaves herself. The Blatant Gift makes this a lot
harder; these precautions reduce people\'s reactions to those inspired
by the normal Gift.

People do not get used to The Gift, even if they have lived with magi
all their lives. They can, however, get used to individuals with The
Gift, just as long association overrides the effects of reputation. The
mundane members of a covenant can be assumed to be used to the resident
magi, and to react to them as appropriate to their actual behavior (see
page @@, in the Covenant chapter, for rules for this). Nevertheless,
they will be suspicious of visiting magi.

People who have dealt with a lot of different Gifted individuals do
become able to recognize the effect of The Gift for what it is. They
still feel the suspicion and envy, but they can act politely anyway.
Mundane Redcaps have sufficient experience to recognize The Gift, and a
mundane given the job of greeting all visitors to a covenant is likely
to get it over the course of a decade or so. Most covenfolk, however,
merely become accustomed to \'their\' magi.

The Parma Magica blocks these effects of The Gift entirely. A maga with
a Parma Magica is not bothered by the Gifts of other magi, although
other people are still bothered by her Gift. This effect may have been
as valuable as Magic Resistance in aiding the foundation of the Order.

Animals also react badly to people with The Gift. In their case, the
reaction tends to be a combination of fear and hostility, with much more
hostility if the magus has the Blatant Gift. Gifted characters cannot
ride horses without magical aid, as the horse tries to throw them off as
quickly as possible. Similarly, they can never train dogs to recognize
them as friends.

Creatures belonging to one of the four supernatural realms may have
different reactions to the Gifted. Some behave like mundane animals,
others like mundane humans, while some appear completely unaffected by
The Gift. Demons, in particular, do not seem to be bothered by The Gift,
but that may just be because they envy every human being anyway.

First Impressions

A group of characters who appear to be ordinary travelers (rather than
an armed band) seek shelter in:

A Typical Village

**Gentle (or no) Gift:** The villagers are cautious, but may offer the
characters shelter in their homes if treated well. If someone has a
separate barn, the characters are probably allowed to sleep there.

**Gift:** The villagers refuse to let the characters into their homes or
property, and bar the doors and keep a watch all night if they camp on
common ground.

**Blatant Gift:** The villagers tell the characters to get out of the
village, and attempt to drive them off if they do not leave voluntarily.
They keep some sort of watch for the next few days to make sure that the
characters do not return.

An Inn

**Gentle (or no) Gift:** Visitors are welcomed if there is space, and
the innkeeper can be bargained down from his initial price. Other guests
eagerly share news with the characters, exchanging tales of where they
have come from for the characters\' stories.

**Gift:** The innkeeper treats the characters coldly. He sets his prices
very high, and will not be bargained down. Other guests ignore the
characters as much as possible, and keep a careful eye on them.

**Blatant Gift:** The innkeeper refuses admittance, and threatens to
call the watch if the characters do not move along.

A Monastery

**Gentle (or no) Gift:** The characters are welcomed, housed in the
guest quarters, and fed at the common table with any other travelers.
They are encouraged to attend services, and other travelers talk as if
at an inn. The characters may stay for two or three nights before the
monks start to drop hints that they should move on.

**Gift:** The characters are welcomed, and housed somewhere isolated in
the monastic complex. They are fed at the common table, but one or two
monks are always around, keeping an eye on them. The other travelers do
not talk to them. The monks start to drop hints that they should move on
after one night.

**Blatant Gift:** The characters are housed in a building outside the
monastery walls, and their food is brought to them there. They are
watched by at least one monk and enough lay brothers to deal with
mundane trouble at all times. If they ask to attend the service, they
are escorted to and from the church and watched at all times. They are
strongly encouraged to leave, and are no longer fed, after the first
night.

A Covenant

These descriptions assume that the visitors announce themselves as
Hermetic magi, and are not known to be hostile. They also assume that
the guard room is outside the Aegis of the Hearth.

**Gentle Gift:** The characters are asked into the guard room while the
magi are informed of their arrival. The guards chat while they are
waiting.

**Gift:** The characters are asked inside while the magi are informed,
but the guards do not talk much, and keep a careful eye on all of them.

**Blatant Gift:** The characters are made to wait outside while someone
brings the magi. The gates are made secure, and all the guards are on
high alert.

Established Relationships

A group including at least one magus arrives somewhere where the magus
has visited many times before.

An Inn

The characters return to an inn where they have always been polite,
tipped generously, and never caused trouble.

**Gentle Gift:** The innkeeper welcomes them enthusiastically, shows
them to the best table in the house, and clears a good room for them to
stay in if they want. If there are regulars at the inn, they are happy
to see the characters again.

**Gift:** The innkeeper welcomes them enthusiastically, and shows them
to a nice table slightly isolated from the rest of the room, to avoid
upsetting the other customers. He clears a good room for them to stay
in, and sees to most of the service personally if he has new staff. He
tries to make small-talk with the magus, but clearly prefers talking to
the companions.

**Blatant Gift:** The innkeeper hurries to meet them at the door,
welcomes them politely, and quickly ushers them to a private room so
that they don\'t disturb the other guests. He serves them personally,
but while he is polite to the magus, he clearly tries to have as little
to do with him as possible. (This assumes that the Blatant Gifted magus
kept a very low profile on earlier visits, so that they were allowed
in.)

A Monastery

The characters return to a monastery where they have always been polite,
at least apparently pious, never caused trouble, and have donated
generously (but not so spectacularly as to be viewed as potential
patrons). The descriptions assume that there are no women in the party,
and that the monastery can cope with bending the normal rules slightly.

**Gentle Gift:** The characters are quickly recognized, greeted warmly,
and may even be invited to dine with the abbot occasionally. If their
normal visits are brief, they are allowed to stay for some time before
anything is said, and even then the monks are concerned as to their
reasons for the long stay rather than keen to move them on.

**Gift:** The characters are housed away from the main guest quarters,
and they take their meals with the monks, who know them, rather than the
other travelers, who don\'t. At least some of the monks are just as
eager to talk to the magus as to the other members of the group.

**Blatant Gift:** The characters are kept waiting at the gate while a
senior monk is sent for. They are housed away from the main guest
quarters, and fed there, although one or two of the monks probably join
them, both out of courtesy and to hear the news. The monks clear a side
chapel so that the characters can attend Mass there, rather than being
in the main body of the church. The characters are not watched, although
the magus with the Blatant Gift is expected to keep to himself as much
as possible (and, to get to this point, he must have done so in the
past).

The Hermetic Arts

The term \"Arts\" refers collectively to Techniques and Forms --- two
classes of magical disciplines that work together in spellcasting.
Techniques govern the essential manipulations that magic can perform;
Forms, the essential natural phenomena that magic can manipulate.
Techniques and Forms have Latin names. A Technique is referred to by a
verb conjugated in first person, and a Form by a noun. You combine one
Technique and one Form to cast a spell, and together their names
indicate the spell\'s general function. For example, a \"Creo Ignem\"
spell employs the Technique of \"Creo\" (\"I create\") and the Form of
\"Ignem\" (\"fire\") and produces light, heat, or fire. A \"Muto Ignem\"
spell (\"Muto\" = \"I transform\") transforms light, heat, or fire in
some way, such as by increasing its intensity, its size, or its shape.

Hermetic magi have a score in each Art. Your scores in the Arts
represent your aptitude for working with the various types of magic.
Arts are not merely knowledges; your Arts are ultimately ways your very
being expresses magical energy. In reflection of this, your score in a
Form (in addition to allowing you to cast spells incorporating that
Form) helps you resist spells of that type and avoid harm from mundane
sources related to that Form. For instance, your Ignem (fire) score
gives you a bonus to resist damage from fire and cold. This bonus is
equal to one fifth of your score in the Form, rounded up, and adds to
your ability to resist any damage deriving from that Form. The most
important examples of each Form bonus\'s applicability are listed under
the Form, but these are not exhaustive lists.

**Form Bonus: Form score/5 (rounded up)**

These bonuses do not stack. If it seems like two would apply to a given
hazard, use only the higher bonus.

In the following two sections, each of the Arts is listed with its
common two-letter abbreviation, its translation from Latin, a general
description, and its Hermetic pronunciation. More detailed descriptions
of what a magus can do with various Technique Form combinations are
given in the Spells chapter on page @@.

Techniques

Creo (Cr) \"I create\"

Creo magic makes things that exist independently into better things of
their kind, which includes bringing them into existence from nothing.
Things that exist independently are called substances, and include
people, trees, and rocks, but do not include colors, weights, and sizes.
Creo can thus both create and heal things.

The kind of thing that something is depends on its form. Natural things,
such as plants, animals, flames, and so on, have simple forms, which
means that the form is just one thing. This makes them easy to create
and heal. Natural things created by magic are always perfect examples of
their kind unless the magus wants them to be damaged. Similarly, magic
can heal a natural thing even if the caster has no idea what is wrong,
as it simply restores the form.

Artificial things, such as bread, swords and books, have complex forms.
Their forms are combinations of several natural forms put together in a
particular way. Creating an artificial thing by magic requires some
skill on the part of the magus, reflected by his Finesse Ability. An
Int + Finesse roll is made to determine how good the created thing is.
Further, a magus can only create something he knows about. Any magus can
create bread or cloth, but in order to create an elaborate mosaic
depicting the foundation of the Order of Hermes the caster would need to
know what it should depict. If he was wrong, the mosaic would also be
wrong. Similar considerations apply to repairing artificial things.

A magus need not be able to create an artificial item by mundane means
in order to create it by magic; he only needs to be somewhat familiar
with it. A magically created item will always be the right sort of thing
unless the magus botches his Finesse roll. Thus, unless the magus
botches, magically created cloth will always be a whole piece and keep
people warm, but it might not be very attractive if he rolled badly. For
further details, see Craft Magic on page @@.

A magus can also use Creo to make something a better example of its
kind, even if it isn\'t actually injured or damaged. Thus, Creo can make
a horse as swift as the fastest horse, or a man as strong as the
strongest man. Creo cannot make a horse able to run as fast as the wind,
because no ordinary horse can do that, nor can it make a man strong
enough to lift a castle. Since maturation involves becoming a better
example of your kind, Creo magic can make something mature quickly.
Aging after maturation involves becoming a worse example of your kind,
and thus is covered by Perdo.

Creo magic can also create unnatural things, such as a winged cat, but a
Muto requisite is necessary.

Magically created things last for the duration of the spell, but their
effects last indefinitely. Thus, the footprints of a magically created
horse do not vanish, nor does its dung, if it was fed on mundane food.
If a magically created horse was fed on mundane food for a year, it
would leave a mundane corpse when the spell expired, as the mundane food
has been converted into mundane body. Conversely, magically created food
only nourishes for as long as the duration lasts, and someone who has
eaten it becomes extremely hungry when the duration expires. Things
washed with magically created water stay clean, but people made drunk
with magically created alcohol instantly sober up.

Pronounced \'CRAY-oh.\'

Intellego (In) \"I perceive\"

Intellego is the Art of perception. It allows a maga to gather
information directly from the forms of things. This information does not
deal with the appearances of things, unless Intellego Imaginem magic is
used. Rather, it provides information about the actual nature of a
thing. Thus, Intellego magic is not deceived by mundane disguises.

Pronounced \'in-TEL-le-go.\'

Muto (Mu) \"I transform\"

By using Muto magic a magus can grant or remove properties something
cannot naturally have. Thus, Muto can give a person wings or turn her
skin green, or turn a person into a wolf. The difficulty of the magic
depends on the extent of the change, so that turning someone\'s skin
green is easy, but turning someone into a golden statue is difficult.

It is possible to use Muto to give something an ability that it does not
normally have. However, this can only change the target; it cannot give
unnatural properties to other things. For example, a Muto Animal spell
could give a feather the ability to cut stone. Feathers cannot naturally
cut stone, but stone can naturally be cut. A Muto Animal spell could not
give a feather the ability to turn stones into gold, because stones
cannot naturally turn into gold. A Muto Terram spell could, of course,
turn a stone into gold.

Muto magic cannot affect the properties that something has naturally,
although it can add other properties to them to mask their effects. Thus
Muto magic can neither injure nor kill someone directly, although it
could render her immobile, by turning her to stone, or kill her
indirectly, by turning her into a fish on dry land so that she
suffocates.

Pronounced \'MOO-toe.\'

Perdo (Pe) \"I destroy\"

Perdo makes things worse examples of the kind of thing they are. It is
the opposite of Creo. Perdo magic can simply destroy things, removing
them completely from existence, or it can destroy aspects of a thing.
Thus, Perdo Corpus could remove a person\'s weight, while leaving the
rest of his properties intact, and Perdo Ignem could make a fire unable
to burn anything. Perdo alone can only destroy the whole of a natural
property; making fire able to burn only wood would be Perdo with a Muto
requisite (see page @@ for requisites), Perdo destroying the ability to
burn anything, and Muto granting the ability to burn only wood, a
property that fire cannot naturally have.

Perdo magic is easier if the thing can naturally lose the property
destroyed. Thus, it is easier to kill a person than to remove his weight
while leaving his other properties intact, because the first can occur
naturally while the second cannot. Further, destroying properties that a
thing cannot naturally lose falls under the Limit of Essential Nature
(see page @@), and thus cannot be permanent; the destroyed properties
return by themselves at the end of the spell\'s duration.

Perdo can only make something a worse example of what it is. You cannot
sharpen a sword with Perdo, even though sharpening involves removing
some of the metal. Similarly, you cannot remove someone\'s property of
being wounded, because that makes them a better example of what they
are.

Pronounced \'PARE-doe.\'

Rego (Re) \"I control\"

The Art of Rego allows a maga to change the state of a thing to some
other state that the individual thing can naturally have. Thus, since
all things can naturally have any location, Rego magic allows a maga to
move things around. Rego can also make a tree blossom out of season, put
a person to sleep, shape a piece of stone into a statue, or weave thread
into a tunic. It cannot make an animal appear young again, because
mature animals cannot naturally become young (although Muto could do
this). Rego also cannot make an animal old, because aging is decay away
from the form (so Perdo could do this). Similarly, although Rego can
make a tree bear fruit out of season, that fruit would not contain
seeds, as the seeds are separate substances (potential trees), and thus
creating them would require Creo. Equally, Rego cannot turn a brown dog
black, because while dogs can naturally be black, the brown dog in
question cannot naturally take on that color.

Mundane craftsmen can only change something\'s state to another state
that the thing can naturally have. Thus, most changes that a mundane
craftsman can make can also be made by Rego magic. In this case, a
Finesse roll is required to determine the quality of the outcome. Rego
can make changes that a mundane craftsman cannot make, however, when the
craftsman is limited simply by available tools, time, or skill. On the
other hand, mundane craftsmen can use their tools to simply damage or
destroy things, and Rego magic cannot do that: it falls under Perdo.
Rego magic could be used to control an axe to cut a tree down, but it
could not be used to cut the tree down directly --- that would be Perdo.
Once the tree was cut down, however, Rego magic could shape the wood
into planks. For more details, see Craft Magic on page @@.

Pronounced \'RAY-go.\'

Forms

Animal (An) \"animal\"

Animal concerns animals of all kinds, from the fish of the sea to the
birds of the air. Animal spells cannot affect people, and Hermetic
theorists still debate the reason for this.

Form Bonus: Soak against animal attacks (claws, bites, etc.), rolls to
resist animal poisons.

Pronounced \'ah-nee-MAHL.\'

Aquam (Aq) \"water\"

Aquam concerns water and all manner of liquids, as well as properties of
liquidity.

Form Bonus: Rolls to resist drowning and thirst, soak against water jets
and the like.

Pronounced \'AH-kwahm.\'

Auram (Au) \"air\"

Auram is the Art of air, wind, and weather. It also governs gaseous
forms in general.

Form bonus: Rolls to resist suffocation, including drowning, soak
against weather phenomena such as lightning.

Pronounced \'OW-rahm.\'

Corpus (Co) \"body\"

Corpus is the Art of human bodies. This Art affects dead bodies and the
bodies of magical or faerie creatures that look human, as well as those
of living humans. Since natural philosophy asserts that these things
have no more in common than their appearance, and Corpus does not affect
human statues, Hermetic theorists are puzzled by the range of this Form.

Form bonus: Soak against human unarmed attacks, rolls to resist disease.
It does *not* apply to aging rolls.

Pronounced \'COR-poos.\'

Herbam (He) \"plant\"

This Form concerns plants and trees. This includes plant matter of all
types, including that which is no longer alive --- like dead wood and
linens.

Form bonus: Soak against wooden weapons, rolls to resist herbal poisons,
rolls to resist starvation.

Pronounced \'HARE-bahm.\'

Ignem (Ig) \"fire\"

This Form concerns fire, heat, and light.

Form bonus: Soak against fire and cold.

Pronounced \'IG-nem.\'

Imaginem (Im) \"image\"

This Form concerns the things in the world that the senses respond to.
Natural philosophy calls them species (SPEH-kee-ayss, to be
distinguished from species of animals and such). All things constantly
give off species for each of the senses. Those for touch and taste do
not travel far, while those for sight require light to get any distance
from the originating body. Imaginem spells normally affect the process
by which species are produced, rather than the species themselves. Thus,
the species emanating from an illusion are not themselves magical.

Imaginem magic can also affect the species themselves, and if it does,
those species are magical, and must Penetrate in order to pass through
Magic Resistance and be perceived. This uses the same guidelines as
spells affecting the process by which species are produced, and is
discussed in more detail in the Jerbiton chapter of *Houses of Hermes:
Societates.*

Note that Imaginem cannot create actual solidity, although it could make
something \'feel solid\' until you accidentally put your hand right
through the surface. Touch illusions are much more effective at changing
the way that an already solid surface feels; making a wooden table feel
like stone, or a knife feel blunt.

Imaginem only changes the appearance that an object presents to the
world. It does not change the actual effects of the object. Imaginem
could make a fire feel cool, but the fire would still burn.

Form bonus: Rolls to resist confusion, deafening, or nausea caused by
sights, sounds, smells, or tastes.

Pronounced \'ih-MAH-gih-nem.\'

Mentem (Me) \"mind\"

This Form concerns minds, thoughts, and spirits. Mentem can also affect
the \"bodies\" of noncorporeal beings, such as ghosts, as these are
maintained in the physical world directly by a spirit\'s will.

Form bonus: Rolls to resist mundane persuasion, deception, or
temptation.

Pronounced \'MEN-tem.\'

Terram (Te) \"earth\"

This Form concerns solids, especially earth and stone.

Form bonus: Soak against metal or stone weapons, rolls to resist mineral
poisons.

Pronounced \'TARE-rahm.\'

Vim (Vi) \"power\"

This Form concerns raw magical power. All the Arts rely on the raw
energy and potential of magic, but this Art refines the use of magic
itself, allowing magi to assume even greater control of their spells.
Vim also affects magical, infernal, divine, and faerie creatures.

Form bonus: Rolls to resist Twilight (see page @@), but not rolls to
comprehend it; soak total against damage inflicted by your own
spell-casting, but not damage inflicted by your own spells.

Pronounced \'WEEM.\'

The Elemental Forms

Aquam, Auram, Ignem, and Terram are the elemental forms, dealing with
the non-living things in the world. Often, a thing falls under more than
one of these Arts. Thus, molten lava is basically Terram, because it is
a form of rock, but its liquidity is governed by Aquam and its heat by
Ignem. Similarly, ice is basically Aquam, being a form of water, but its
solidity is covered by Terram and its coldness by Ignem. As a rule,
simple creation or destruction of a non-living thing needs only the
basic Art, without requisites (see page @@). Thus, to create ice you
need only Creo Aquam. However, affecting the aspects and properties of a
thing might use the other Arts. Thus, making ice warm would require Creo
Ignem. A Creo Aquam spell with an Ignem requisite could create warm ice
--- still solid, but warm. Alternatively, a magus could simply create
warmth, and allow it to naturally melt the ice.

Mist is a kind of air, so its basic form is Auram, but its dampness
means that it is also affected by Aquam in certain respects. Weather
phenomena are all basically Auram, including rain storms, but a spell to
affect the rain alone would be Aquam. Hail storms, then, are basically
Auram, but the hail stones are basically Aquam with elements of Ignem
and Terram.

Limits of Magic

Magic, though a very powerful force, is not omnipotent. There are
certain laws it must conform to and certain limits that it can never
exceed. The limits to Hermetic magic are described below. Most Hermetic
theorists believe that there are only two fundamental limits, the Limit
of the Divine and the Limit of Essential Nature, and that the other
limits are derived from one or other of these. Some theorists think that
the lesser limits are merely flaws in Bonisagus\'s theory.

The boundaries of Hermetic magic are well known to the Order, but that
doesn\'t stop magi from challenging them. Indeed, many magi spend
countless years searching in vain for a way to transcend these limits.
Certainly, any magus who actually succeeds in doing so will become
famous, perhaps as famous as the Order\'s very Founders.

The Limit of the Divine

Hermetic magic cannot affect the Divine. Any magic attempting to do so
simply fails. Everyone agrees that Hermetic powerlessness in the face of
miracles is a result of this limit, as is the inability of Hermetic
magic to affect the transubstantiated bread and wine of the Mass.

The agents of the Divine, such as saints and angels, are protected from
magic to some extent, but are not normally completely immune. As a
general rule, it seems that any being with a will separate from God\'s
can be affected by magic, at least in principle. Only direct action by
God is completely immune.

The Limit of Essential Nature

Any magic which violates a thing\'s essential nature must be maintained,
and when power is no longer supplied the thing returns to its natural
state. Thus, Muto magic must always be maintained, while the effects of
Rego magic persist after the spell expires. A thing\'s essential nature
cannot itself be changed. While Hermetic magic can completely change the
way a thing appears, it cannot affect what that thing is.

A thing\'s essential nature varies depending on what it is. All human
beings are essentially human; mortal creatures with reason, senses, and
the ability to move and reproduce. The basic shape of the human body is
also part of the essential nature, although bits can be cut off. The
game works on the assumption that every feature of someone's physical
appearance is either an injury (which can be fixed with Creo magic), or
part of their essential nature. This is necessary to avoid the ability
to permanently change appearance with a single Momentary Duration Rego
spell. A single characteristic may be an injury for one person, and part
of the essential nature of another. For example, some people are
essentially blind, whereas others are blind merely as a result of
chance. As a rule, any disability purchased as a Flaw at character
creation is part of the character\'s essential nature, while
disabilities acquired later are not.

The Lesser Limits

The Limit of Aging

Hermetic magic cannot halt or reverse natural aging, although it can
slow it down and mitigate its effects. This means that Hermetic magic
cannot remove Decrepitude. Most magi think this derives from the Limit
of Essential Nature.

The Limit of Arcane Connections

Hermetic magic cannot affect an unsensed target without an Arcane
Connection. This is widely believed to be a flaw in Hermetic theory, as
Intellego magic is much less tightly bound by this limit than other
kinds. Intellego can determine whether, for example, there are any
people behind a wall the magus can see, but Perdo Corpus magic cannot
affect those people until the magus is aware of them.

The Limit of Creation

Hermetic magic is incapable of creating anything permanently without raw
vis. This limit affects all uses of Creo magic. However, as pure Creo
magic does not violate the essential nature of its target, Creo magic
that does use raw vis does not need to be maintained. If a Creo effect
has a Muto requisite, to create something unnatural, the effect cannot
be made permanent by using raw vis. This applies to the whole creation,
not just the unnatural aspects. Theorists are divided on whether this
derives from the Limit of the Divine or the Limit of Essential Nature. A
few think it is a flaw in Bonisagus\'s theory.

The Limit of Energy

Hermetic magic cannot restore one\'s physical energy (Fatigue levels),
nor can it restore Confidence (see page @@). Most magi think that this
is a flaw in Hermetic theory.

The Limit of Experience

Hermetic magic cannot create skills or knowledge in a person by
manipulating their mind, nor can it transfer such things (Abilities, in
game terms) from one person to another. This is widely believed to be a
flaw in Hermetic theory, although a few magi have suggested that it is a
flaw in their understanding of Abilities. Hermetic magic can create much
simpler things of the same general type as Abilities, which would
support the latter interpretation. (This is discussed in more detail in
*Houses of Hermes: Societates,* pages 68--69.)

The Limit of the Infernal

Intellego magic is almost completely useless against the Infernal,
because it reveals only what the demons want you believe, whether that
is true or not.

The source of this limit is fiercely debated. Optimists think it is a
limit in Hermetic theory. Pessimists think it is derived from the Limit
of the Divine. Moderates think it is derived from the Limit of Essential
Nature, in that deception is the nature of demons, so that if you use
Intellego on them you only detect their deceptions. Heretical magi point
out that, thanks to this limit, there is no way to tell the difference
between God and a very powerful demon.

The Limit of the Lunar Sphere

Hermetic magic cannot affect the lunar sphere, nor anything above it.
Most magi think this derives from the Limit of the Divine. The lunar
sphere is the innermost of the celestial spheres, which carry the stars
and planets on their revolutions around the earth, and so this limit
rarely bothers magi directly.

The Limit of the Soul

Hermetic magic cannot create an immortal soul, and so may not create
true human life nor restore the dead to life. Most magi think this
derives from the Limit of the Divine, although a significant number
think that Hermetic magic\'s inability to raise the dead reflects
nothing more than a flaw in the theory.

Animals have no immortal souls, and so may be created. Magical creatures
and faeries are generally believed not to have immortal souls, and there
are spells that appear to create them, but some magi believe that such
spells really summon existing beings. Angels and demons are nothing but
immortal souls.

The Limit of Time

Hermetic magic is incapable of altering the passage of time. It cannot
affect anything in the past, and can only affect the future by making
changes in the present. This limit also means that Hermetic magic cannot
scry on the past or future. Most magi think this derives from the Limit
of the Divine.

The Limit of True Feeling

A few humans have a love, friendship or faith that Hermetic magic cannot
affect in any way. (In game terms, this is indicated by a Virtue or
Flaw.) Magi agree that this must derive from one of the two fundamental
Limits, because most emotions can be affected by magic, but they
disagree as to which one.

The Limit of Vis

Hermetic magic cannot change the Art to which raw vis is attuned. Most
magi think that this is a result of the Limit of Essential Nature.

The Limit of Warping

Prolonged exposure to active magic or high auras usually causes changes,
generally referred to as warping. Hermetic magic is completely unable to
affect these changes once they have happened. Wizard\'s Twilight (see
page @@) is one manifestation of warping.

Most magi would like to believe that this derives from the Limit of the
Divine, as that would make magic a manifestation of Divine power. Others
believe that it is derived from the Limit of Essential Nature.

The Limit of Magic Resistance

Non-Hermetic magic is incapable of granting general Magic Resistance, as
far as Hermetic magi know. (The same is true of Faerie powers, but not
the Divine or Infernal.) This is obviously not a fundamental limit of
magic, as Hermetic magic does grant Magic Resistance, through the Parma
Magica and Form scores, and many magi take this as evidence that
Hermetic magic is simply superior to all other traditions. More
knowledgeable magi are aware that some non-Hermetic traditions break
some of the Lesser Limits of Hermetic magic. The optimistic among them
take this as evidence that Hermetic magic could also break those limits.
See *Ancient Magic, Rival Magic,* and *Hedge Magic Revised Edition* for
examples of such traditions.

Raw Vis

Raw magic power, known as vis (pronounced \'WEES\'), is sometimes found
stored in and partially constituting some physical substance. This can
occur either because a magus has trapped it there or because it was
deposited there by natural magical processes. Vis trapped in some
substance is called raw vis, and magi have many uses for it.

Raw vis is always associated with a particular Technique or Form. Thus,
there is Ignem vis, Creo vis, Imaginem vis-even Vim vis. Raw vis
invariably exists in some kind of matter appropriate to the Technique or
Form to which it corresponds. Animal vis might be found in blood, skins,
or horns; Herbam vis in plant fiber or sap; Terram vis in crystals; and
so on. When raw vis is used its power is permanently lost. When this
happens its substance often changes --- dissolving, withering,
crumbling, shriveling, or otherwise degrading --- in whatever way is
appropriate to it. This normally does not happen if the vis has been
magically transferred to another receptacle (see page @@), and never
happens to such artificial receptacles.

Raw vis can be used in many applications. Examples include strengthening
a spell, performing a ritual, creating a magical enchantment, or aiding
in the study of the magical Art to which it corresponds. Because of its
utility, vis is greatly prized by magi. They often use it as a form of
currency, measuring it in units called pawns. Ten pawns are said to make
a rook, while ten rooks make a queen. A queen of vis is a legendary
quantity, and it would be highly unlikely for a given magus to possess
even a sizable fraction of such an amount.

Magi often wear sources of vis in necklaces or rings so that other
wizards or magical beings can readily perceive that they have vis to use
in response to a threat.

Casting Spells

Spellcasting is based on the maga\'s *Casting Score:*

**Casting Score: Technique + Form + Stamina + Aura Modifier**

When casting a spell, success is determined from the maga\'s *Casting
Total.* This is calculated in different ways, depending on the type of
spell.

If the generation of the casting total involves rolling a stress die, a
botch is normally possible. If the casting roll botches, the casting
total is treated as zero, in addition to any other effects.

Spell Basics

All Hermetic spells have a Technique, Form, and Level. The Technique and
Form are determined by the kind of effect that the spell has, while the
Level is determined by how powerful that effect is. Spells also have a
magnitude, which is equal to the level divided by five, rounded up.
These terms are discussed in more detail in the remainder of this
chapter and in the introduction to the Spells chapter, page @@.

Formulaic Magic

Formulaic magic is the use of spells that the maga already knows. The
casting total is the casting score plus a die roll.

**Formulaic Casting Total: Casting Score + Die Roll**

The type of die rolled depends on the situation. If the maga is not
under any pressure, it is a simple die. If she is in a stressful
situation, it is a stress die. If the maga has mastered the spell, the
die is always a stress die, but in a calm situation there are no botch
dice, even if the maga is in a non-Magic aura (see below, page @@).

If the casting total equals or exceeds the level of the spell, the spell
is cast and the maga suffers no ill-effects. If the casting total falls
short of the spell level by ten or less, the spell takes effect and the
maga loses a Fatigue level. If the casting total falls short of the
spell level by more than ten the spell fails to take effect, but the
maga still loses a Fatigue level.

Casting Total -- Spell Level Spell Cast? Fatigue Levels Lost

0 or higher Yes 0

--1 to --10 Yes 1

--11 or lower No 1

It takes only a few seconds to cast a Formulaic spell.

Ritual Magic

Ritual spells are like Formulaic spells, but they take longer to cast,
and involve both elaborate rituals and the expenditure of raw vis. It
takes fifteen minutes per magnitude to cast a Ritual spell, and the maga
must expend one pawn of vis per magnitude of the spell.

**Ritual Casting Total: Casting Score + Artes Liberales + Philosophiae +
Stress Die**

The more elaborate process of casting a Ritual spell allows the maga to
incorporate astrological calculations and to draw on the powers of
natural magic. This is reflected in the addition of the maga\'s Artes
Liberales and Philosophiae scores to the casting total. However, a maga
with no experience points in either Ability may still cast Ritual Magic.

The vis used in a Ritual spell must match either the Technique or the
Form of the spell. It is possible to use both types of vis at once. In
addition, the maximum number of pawns of a given type that a magus may
use in spellcasting is his score in the corresponding Art.

The magnitude of Ritual spells, and the need to incorporate many
elements, means that a stress die is always rolled, which normally
creates the possibility of a botch. However, if the maga has mastered
the spell, there are no botch dice in a calm situation, as for Formulaic
spells.

See the table to determine whether the spell succeeds or not, and how
many Fatigue levels are lost. Fatigue levels lost to Ritual Magic are
long-term Fatigue levels, which can only be regained by a good night\'s
sleep (see page @@). If the maga does not have enough Fatigue levels
remaining, she takes wounds as well. If she would have taken one more
Fatigue level, the wound is minor, if two more, medium, if three more,
heavy, and if four more, incapacitating. For example, consider a maga
with two remaining Fatigue levels who is casting a level 30 Ritual
spell. She generates a casting total of 22, 8 less than the spell level.
The spell is cast, but the maga loses her remaining two Fatigue levels,
falling unconscious, and then takes a minor wound.

Casting Total-Spell Level Spell Cast? Fatigue Levels Lost

0 or higher Yes One

--1 to --5 Yes Two

--6 to --10 Yes Three

--11 to --15 No Four

--16 or more No Five

Spontaneous Magic

Spontaneous magic involves the production of effects which do not
correspond to a spell the magus knows. Magi may choose whether or not to
exert themselves when casting Spontaneous Magic, but this affects the
casting total. If a maga exerts herself, she loses a Fatigue level
immediately after the spell is cast, so that if this loss renders her
unconscious the spell takes effect first. Casting fatiguing Spontaneous
magic is inherently stressful, and so it always uses a stress die, with
the risk of a botch, no matter how calm the environment and the maga may
otherwise be.

**Fatiguing Spontaneous Magic Casting Total: (Casting Score + Stress
Die)/2**

**Non-Fatiguing Spontaneous Magic Casting Total: Casting Score/5**

Before casting the spell, the maga must decide on the effect she is
trying to create. If her final total is too low for that effect, the
spell fails. The chosen effect may be open ended. For example, the maga
may want to create the brightest light she can. In this case, the spell
will fail if the final level cannot produce any light, but otherwise
greater totals will produce brighter light.

If the maga rolls well, she may choose to increase any or all of the
Range, Duration, or Target of the spell, but may not change the basic
effect. If the effect was open ended, the maga may choose how much of
the casting total to devote to the power of the effect, and how much to
devote to Range, Duration, and Target. She may also choose to cast the
spell at a lower level than her casting total, to increase its
Penetration.

Modifiers from circumstances that affect the casting score are divided
just like the basic casting score. Modifiers that affect the casting
total are not divided.

Penetration Total

The maga\'s casting total measures the total amount of power that she
can channel to the spell. The spell\'s level determines how much power
is needed to create the intended effect. Any excess power is used to
overcome, or Penetrate, magical defenses. It is possible for the casting
total to be lower than the spell level, in which case the maga has no
spare energy for penetrating defenses, and even the weakest defense
stops the spell.

The Penetration Total measures how effectively the spell can overcome
the Magic Resistance of its targets. It is calculated in the same way
for all spells.

**Penetration Total: Casting Total + Penetration Bonus -- Spell Level**

The Penetration Bonus is at least equal to the magus\'s score in the
Penetration Ability, but may be increased in various ways; see the
Penetration section on page @@, below. This may mean that a spell has
different Penetration Totals for different targets.

The Penetration Total may be zero or negative. For example, if a magus
with a Penetration Bonus of 0, because he has no score in Penetration,
casts a Formulaic spell with a Casting Total 5 less than the spell\'s
level, his Penetration Total is --5. If the Penetration is zero or
negative, the spell cannot affect any target with Magic Resistance, even
if the score of the Magic Resistance is 0. However, it can still affect
targets with no Magic Resistance.

If the Penetration Total exceeds a target\'s Magic Resistance, the spell
affects that target. If a spell is targeted at several individuals who
have different levels of Magic Resistance, it is possible for the spell
to affect some but not others.

The rules for calculating Penetration for the powers of supernatural
creatures are given in the Bestiary chapter (page @@). The rules for the
Penetration of other supernatural abilities are given on page @@, or in
the supplement with the rules for the ability; in most cases, the
Penetration is the total generated for the ability plus Penetration
Bonus, minus the Ease Factor for the effect.

Concentration

A maga must concentrate in order to cast a spell. If she is distracted,
she must make a concentration roll.

**Concentration Roll: Stamina + Concentration + Stress Die**

If the concentration roll fails, the spell fails. If the spell casting
roll involved a stress die, you must still roll to see whether the maga
botches, and you get one extra botch die. The Ease Factor for the
concentration roll depends on the distraction.

Situation Ease Factor

Still Trivial (0)

Walking Simple (3)

Running Average (9)

Dodging Hard (12)

Jostled Average (9)

Sudden noise or flash of light Average (9)

Knocked Down Hard (12)

Damaged this round Very Hard (15)

Some spells are also maintained for as long as the maga concentrates. In
that case, the Ease Factors on the above table are reduced by three
points each.

There are some things it is possible to do while maintaining a spell,
but impossible to do while casting. These still distract magi who are
concentrating on maintaining a spell, and so concentration rolls are
necessary, but the Ease Factors on the following table are already
correct, and should not be reduced by three points.

Situation Ease Factor

Answering a single easy yes/no question Hard (12)

Conversation Very Hard (15)

Casting another spell Very Hard (15)

Maintaining another spell Hard (12), +3 for each spell beyond the second

Injured 3 times wound penalty to Concentration rolls (this is instead of
the normal penalty)

For a continuing situation, such as injury or maintaining another spell,
you must make a concentration roll every two minutes (Diameter
duration). If you are undistracted, you can maintain concentration for
fifteen minutes for every point you have in the Concentration Ability.

Note that, if a spell is designed to let the magus do something, doing
that thing does not interfere with concentrating on the spell. This
applies to spells that let the magus talk to animals, plants, or water,
or to spells that let the magus run very quickly.

Spellcasting Options

All Spells

The following option can be used with all spells.

Using Raw Vis

It is possible to use raw vis to boost the power of a maga\'s spells.
The vis must match either the Technique or the Form of spell, and a maga
may only use a number of pawns of a given type of vis equal to her score
in that Art.

**Limit on vis use in spell casting: The maga\'s score in the Art of the
vis**

For all spells, a maga may expend vis to increase her casting score.
Each pawn of vis expended increases the Casting Score by two.

**Vis boost to Casting Score: +2 casting score per pawn**

Vis must be used when casting Ritual spells, as noted above. Vis used in
this way does not increase the Casting Score, but it does count against
the limits of what can be used.

It is possible to use vis matching both the Technique and the Form in
one casting of a spell, and the amount of each type of vis is limited
separately. Thus, a magus with a score of 5 in the Technique and 3 in
the Form could use up to 8 pawns of vis, no more than 5 corresponding to
the Technique and no more than 3 corresponding to the Form.

For every pawn of vis used, the maga must roll an extra botch die if the
casting roll is stress and comes up a zero. This includes the pawns used
to make a Ritual spell possible. Remember that, if the maga can cast a
Formulaic spell under calm conditions, she can use a simple die and thus
avoid the possibility of botching.

**Vis botch dice: +1 botch die per pawn of vis used**

Non-Ritual Spells

The following option can be used when casting Formulaic or most
Spontaneous spells, but not for Ritual Magic, or Spontaneous spells cast
ceremonially (see later).

Words and Gestures

Spells are normally cast with a firm voice and bold gestures. However,
the caster may choose to be more or less subtle. Increased subtlety
gives a penalty to the casting score, while reduced discretion gives a
bonus. If the maga changes the volume of her voice, she also changes the
range of Voice range spells.

Words Modifier Gestures Modifier Voice Range

Loud +1 Exaggerated +1 50 paces

Firm 0 Bold 0 15 paces

Quiet --5 Subtle --2 5 paces

None --10 None --5 0 paces (caster only)

The total modifier is determined by adding the Words and Gestures
modifiers together. Thus, using exaggerated gestures but making no noise
gives a total penalty of --9 to the casting score.

The process of casting a Ritual or ceremonial spell uses all of these
options at different points, as determined by the ritual. Thus, unless
the caster can speak in a loud voice and make exaggerated gestures, they
cannot cast a Ritual spell.

Spontaneous Spells

The following options can only be used when a maga is using Spontaneous
magic, but can be used equally for fatiguing and non-fatiguing
Spontaneous spells.

Fast Casting

A maga may choose to cast a Spontaneous spell extremely quickly, as a
response to an attack or other surprising event. A fast-cast spell is
always cast in the way that a maga casts urgent spells normally. In most
cases, that means using a firm voice and bold gestures. However, for
example, a maga with the Subtle Magic Virtue who almost never uses
gestures to cast spells would also cast fast-cast spells without
gestures. It is not possible to apply options that affect the spell
itself, rather than the way it is cast, as there is not enough time for
the maga to think about anything other than the core features of the
spell. For example, a fast-cast spell cannot be boosted with raw vis.

There are two stages: determining the speed of casting, and determining
the effect of the spell.

The speed of casting is determined as follows:

**Fast Casting Speed: Quickness + Finesse + Stress Die**

The Ease Factor for this roll depends on the situation. In combat, the
Ease Factor is always the opponent\'s Initiative Total. Other Ease
Factors should be set by the storyguide. Note that, even in combat, the
fast casting speed is not an Initiative Total. A maga may be able to
cast more than one fast-cast spell in one combat round. However, each
spell after the first takes a cumulative --6 penalty to the Fast Casting
Speed: --6 for the second spell, --12 for the third, and so on. Once one
of these rolls has been failed, that is the roll does not equal or
exceed the Ease Factor for that roll, which may be the Initiative Total
of another combatant, the maga can cast no further spells in that combat
round.

If the roll for a fast-cast spell fails, the maga may still cast that
spell. It will be too late to have its intended effect, and the maga may
choose to abort the spell without any risk.

A maga casting a fast-cast spell must subtract ten from the Casting
Score before calculating the Casting Total. In addition, if the player
rolls a zero, there are two additional botch dice.

**Fast Cast Penalty: --10 to Casting Score**

**Fast Cast Botch Dice: +2 botch dice**

In order to create a fast-cast defense against magic, a maga must know
the Hermetic Form that governs that magic. If the caster is a Hermetic
magus and is using words and gestures that she can hear and see, she may
determine this automatically. A Perception + Awareness roll may be
needed to catch the details of the gestures, particularly if they are
subtle.

In other circumstances, the maga must work the Form out. A Perception +
Awareness roll against an Ease Factor of 15 minus the magnitude of the
effect is needed.

**Determining Form of Magical Effect: Perception + Awareness vs. 15 --
effect magnitude**

In general, a fast-cast defense with half the level of the attacking
spell is enough to protect the maga herself or one other individual. The
spell still takes effect, and the side effects of deflecting the spell
may have to be dealt with. A fast-cast defense that matches or exceeds
the level of the attacking spell can completely neutralize it, probably
in a fairly spectacular fashion.

Fast-cast defenses against mundane threats work if the level of the
spell is high enough to neutralize the threat.

Ceremonial Casting

A maga may spend fifteen minutes for every magnitude of the spell
performing rituals to invoke the powers of natural magic. As a result,
she may add her scores in Artes Liberales and Philosophiae to her
Casting Score. A maga may use ceremonial casting even if she has no
experience points in one of the two Abilities, but not if she has no
experience points in either.

No matter how good the roll, the level of the spell is limited by the
time the maga spent in casting it, to one magnitude per fifteen minutes.
However, the casting total may be very high, so the spell may have good
Penetration. Thus, if the maga spends one hour preparing, the final
spell cannot be higher than fourth magnitude, which means its level
cannot be higher than 20. However, if she gets lucky and rolls a 64 on
the stress die, the spell will have a Penetration of 12 (32, which is
half of 64, minus the maximum spell level of 20) plus half her
Technique + Form + Artes Liberales + Philosophiae + Stamina total.

**Ceremonial Casting Bonus: Add Artes Liberales and Philosophiae to
Casting Score**

Characters may also increase the effectiveness of ceremonial casting by
using props, and by using a prepared spellcasting space.

The use of props provides a bonus based on the mystical significance of
the items used. Large props are the most effective, but are very
expensive, because master craftsmen must make them from rare materials.
Large props are also difficult to transport. Medium-sized props are the
ones magi can create or acquire most easily. Many evocative items that
may found during stories are medium-sized props. Tiny props are
expensive because they must be made from precious metals and gemstones
that accord with the Arts. Props aid magic, but are not magical items.
They may be constructed or repaired by a skilled craftsman (Ability of 5
or more) under the guidance of a magus, without distracting the magus
from study.

Bonus to Casting Score for casting with ceremonial props, by prop size:

+1 for gemstones and other tiny items, that can be carried in a belt
pouch by a magus.

+2 for small props, fifteen of which completely fill a backpack.

+3 for medium sized props, such that fifteen would completely fill a
horse\'s saddlebags, or a barrel.

+4 for large props, such that fifteen could only be transported by a
wagon

+5 for props so large that it is impractical to move them from the room
in which they are constructed.

As an example, Carmine of Flambeau, the wife of the Primus of Jerbiton,
prefers Creo Ignem effects. She wears a ruby necklace and a coral
brooch, and uses these as a small ceremonial kit when casting small
effects in cities. Her husband prefers Rego Imaginem magic. He has a
medium-sized ceremonial kit, two items of which are a wand made of the
crown of a fairy king that he defeated (Imaginem), and his cat familiar
(Rego, for this particular cat).

Prepared space reduces the time required to cast spells ceremonially.

Casting time when using ceremonial spaces, in minutes per magnitude:

Twelve minutes per magnitude: a space that the magus has created as a
temporary recourse. For example, a series of chalk circles on the floor
of a rented room in a foreign city.

Nine minutes per magnitude: a space naturally suited to the performance
of ceremonial magic. These spaces are often beautiful. For example, a
cliff ledge that faces the sunrise, the pinnacle of the covenant\'s
tallest tower at night, or the depths of an autumn forest.

Six minutes per magnitude: A space that the magus has carefully designed
to have suitable architectural features, lines of light and reflection,
and appropriate placement of color.

Three minutes per magnitude: The magus\'s laboratory, or other place of
magical contemplation.

One minute per magnitude: A room designed solely for ceremonial casting,
which contains props of the largest variety, and mystical choreographies
permanently inscribed on the floor. Characters with the Mystical
Choreography Virtue cast ceremonial magic at this speed regardless of
how temporary their prepared space.

Arcane Connections

Arcane Connections allow a maga to cast a spell on something she is not
currently sensing, as long as she is currently aware of the Arcane
Connection. Mystically, the Arcane Connection is still a part of the
target, thus making the spell possible. However, the spell must have a
range of Arcane Connection, which makes casting spells like this harder
than casting them on a target that is actually present.

One thing, the connection, is an Arcane Connection to something else,
the target, if the connection was very closely associated with the
target, often by being a part of it. Once the connection is removed from
the target, the connection starts to fade. The length of time that the
connection lasts depends on the nature of the connection.

Arcane Connections must be stored carefully, or else they become links
to different people or places.

**Duration Example Connections**

Hours Air from a specific place, shed skin from a human being, water
from a moving body of water.

Days A frequently used tool or item of clothing, water from a still body
of water, something mundane made by the target, excrement.

Weeks Lesser enchanted device, an item designed and made by the target,
for example a letter composed and written by the target. An item
designed by one person and made by another is an Arcane Connection
lasting for days, to the person who made it.

Months Strand of hair, favorite tool or item of clothing, wood shard
from a specific place, feather from a bird, scale from a reptile.

Years Invested device, rock or metal from a specific place, blood, lock
of hair, group of feathers from a bird, group of scales from a reptile.

Decades Body part.

Indefinite Hermetic familiar (link to master), Hermetic magus (link to
familiar), Hermetic talisman (link to creator), fixed Arcane Connections
(see \'Fixing Arcane Connections\' in the Laboratory chapter, page @@).

Penetration

Penetration is the ability of a spell or other magical ability to affect
something that has Magic Resistance. If something has no Magic
Resistance, Penetration is irrelevant. A single spell may have several
targets, for example all the members of a Group. In that case, any
targets without Magic Resistance are affected no matter what the
Penetration of the spell, but a target with Magic Resistance are only
affected if the spell Penetrates that target\'s Magic Resistance.

Any character with the Penetration Ability can use sympathetic magic to
increase the Penetration of her magic. The Penetration Bonus starts at
one times the character\'s Penetration Ability, and the multiplier can
be increased. This requires that the character have an Arcane Connection
to the target of the magic.

**Arcane Connection Bonus to Multiplier**

Lasts hours or days +1

Lasts weeks or months +2

Lasts years or decades +3

Lasts indefinitely +4

The same Arcane Connection can be used to both allow the use of Arcane
Connection Range, and to boost Penetration. Only one Arcane Connection
can be used to give a bonus to Penetration against a single target, but
it is possible to use Arcane Connections to multiple targets to boost
the Penetration of a single spell. The spell might then have a different
Penetration against each of its targets. Note that a caster might think
she has an Arcane Connection to a target, but be mistaken. In that case,
the Arcane Connection does \"work\", but the increased Penetration is
irrelevant as that individual is not targeted by the spell.

Once a character has an Arcane Connection she can use other sympathetic
magic to increase the multiplier further. Any number of sympathetic
connections may be used, and their bonuses stack. The following table
provides some examples, but is not exhaustive. Each troupe should
specify the kinds of sympathetic connection it allows, but no single
connection should give a bonus of greater than +2.

Forceless Casting

A maga can deliberately ensure the Penetration Total of a spell does not
exceed 0. In essence, the maga casts the spell with no more effort than
is required to avoid Fatigue and opts not to use her Penetration skill.
As most magi have at least a Magic Resistance of 0, she can ensure her
spell will not affect them, provided she does not botch. It is not
possible for a maga to choose a Penetration Total other than 0, although
mystery cults may know secret techniques that permit this, and original
research might also reveal a method.

Forceless casting requires no particular skill or effort. It is useful
in magical tournaments, or when a maga casts a spell covering a large
area and wants to avoid inadvertently affecting any magi who may be
within the target area.

Sympathetic Connections

**Sympathetic Connection Bonus to Multiplier**

Caster is blood relative of target +1

Signature of target +1

Target\'s nickname or birth name\* +1

Name target uses in secret magic rituals +1

Target\'s horoscope for today\*\* +1

Target\'s nativity horoscope\*\*\* +2

Symbolic representation of target\*\*\*\* +2

\* Baptismal names cannot be used in sympathetic magic.

\*\* Caster must know the target\'s current location, and succeed in an
Int + Artes Liberales (Astronomy) roll against an Ease Factor of 9.
Casting such a horoscope takes an hour.

\*\*\* Caster must know the target\'s place and time of birth, and
succeed in an Int + Artes Liberales (Astronomy) roll against an Ease
Factor of 9. Casting such a horoscope takes a day\'s work.

\*\*\*\* An illustration or model of some sort. A simple representation,
good for one use, takes several hours and a Dexterity + Craft roll of 9+
to create. A permanent representation takes a month of work and a
Dexterity + Craft roll of 12+. The representation can only be used by
the person who made it.

Penetration Example

For example, Mari Amwithig wants to be able to cast *Agony of the Beast*
on the dragon that has been causing problems for the covenant. She has a
Penetration score of 3, specialized in Perdo, so it is effectively 4.
That would typically give her a Penetration of around 20, because she
can expect to exceed the spell level by 16 on most rolls. That isn\'t
enough to affect the dragon.

The first thing she does is obtain an Arcane Connection to the dragon,
and fix it in the laboratory. This gives her a bonus of +4 to the
Penetration multiplier, so now her Penetration score is multiplied by 5
(1 + 4) when determining her penetration bonus. Her typical penetration
is now around 36, which is better but still not quite good enough, she
thinks.

Mari\'s player argues that dragons have horoscopes just like anyone
else, and the storyguide agrees. Unfortunately, Mari has no idea when,
or even if, the dragon was born, so she can only make a daily horoscope.
That increases the Penetration multiplier by +1, so her Penetration
score is now multiplied by 6. This makes her typical Penetration total
40.

Mari has also Mastered the spell (see page @@, below) and taken the
Penetration Mastery special ability. She has a score of 1 in the Mastery
Ability for the spell, and this adds to her Penetration score, so that
instead of multiplying 4 by 6, she multiplies 5 (4 for Penetration, 1
for the Mastery Ability) by 6. This raises her typical penetration total
to 46, which she thinks will be enough to get the dragon\'s attention.
Arcane Connection and horoscope in hand, she sets off.

Magic Resistance

Most human beings have no Magic Resistance. If the target of a spell has
no Magic Resistance, then he suffers its effects no matter how low the
Penetration total, even if it is negative. Humans can gain general Magic
Resistance from three sources: the Divine, the Infernal, and Hermetic
magic. No other magical or faerie powers are able to provide general
Magic Resistance to humans, but creatures with a Might score have Magic
Resistance equal to their Might (see page @@).

Hermetic magi have a base Magic Resistance equal to their score in the
Form most applicable to the spell cast. In case of doubt, Vim is a safe
default. Thus, a maga attacked with magical fire would have Magic
Resistance at least equal to her Ignem score. Since all Hermetic magi
have a score of at least 0 in every Form, a maga never has a Magic
Resistance of less than zero.

If the target of a spell has Magic Resistance of 0, she is only affected
if the Penetration total is 1 or greater. Thus, Magic Resistance 0 is
substantially better than no Magic Resistance.

Parma Magica

The Parma Magica, Bonisagus\'s great invention, is an Ability that
grants Magic Resistance that adds to the resistance arising from a
maga\'s Form scores.

Parma Magica adds Magic Resistance equal to five times the maga\'s score
in the Ability to the resistance based on her Forms. It takes two
minutes to perform the Parma Magica ritual, and the Magic Resistance
granted lasts until sunset or sunrise, whichever comes first. A magus
can suppress his Parma by concentrating, and this also suppresses his
Form resistance. This suppression lasts for as long as the magus
concentrates, which takes the same effort as concentration on
maintaining a spell, and leaves him with no Magic Resistance against
anything.

An unconscious magus may not suppress his Parma, and thus has his full
resistance against all magic, even helpful magic. His Parma will go down
naturally at sunrise or sunset, at which point he has only the
resistance based on his Forms. There is no way for an unconscious magus
to lower his Form resistance.

A magus may also protect one other person for each point in Parma
Magica, with their consent. He must touch each person to start the
protection, and it lasts as long as at least one character can see the
other. The magus may cancel the protection at will, at any distance.
While a magus is protecting others, his effective Parma Magica score is
reduced by 3 points, both for himself and for the other people he is
protecting. If the magus has a Parma Magica score of 3 or lower, his
Parma Magica provides each character, including himself, with a Magic
Resistance of 0. In the magus\'s case, this is added to his Form
resistance, and a magus protected by another magus\'s Parma Magica may
also add his Form resistance.

Awareness of Attack

If a spell is stopped by Magic Resistance, the target knows that some
effect has been stopped, but knows nothing about it. If a spell
penetrates her Magic Resistance, she gets no warning other than any
obvious effects the spell has. A very subtle spell might well go
completely unnoticed if cast successfully.

The Functioning of Magic Resistance

Magic Resistance keeps magic away from the maga, her clothing, and other
items that are very close to her. It does not dispel magic.

Spells cast with Personal Range do not have to overcome the caster\'s
own Magic Resistance. Spell cast with any other Range, even if cast by
the maga on herself, do have to overcome the caster\'s own Magic
Resistance.

If the maga is the Individual target of the spell, a resisted spell
simply fails to work. If she is part of a Group or large Target, the
spell fails to work on her, but may affect other people within the
target.

If the target of the spell is a magical thing, which then attempts to
damage the maga, the spell works, but the created thing is unable to
affect the maga unless it Penetrates her Magic Resistance.

Things that are created and sustained by magic (anything not created as
a mundane thing by a Ritual spell) are magical for these purposes.
Things moved by magic can cross the resistance, but their motion cannot,
unless the spell Penetrates the Magic Resistance.

In all the following examples, the Penetration of the magical effect is
assumed to be equal to or lower than the maga\'s Magic Resistance.

A mind control spell targeted at the maga alone fails.

A mind control spell targeted at a group including the maga fails to
affect the maga, but may affect other members of the group.

A jet of magical water parts around the maga, and she does not even get
wet.

A jet of normal water driven by magic reaches the maga and makes her
wet, but has no force of impact, as the magical power cannot pass her
resistance.

A quantity of normal water magically raised over the maga\'s head and
dropped makes her wet and strikes with impact, because it is not being
moved by magic when it reaches the maga.

A magical rock thrown at the maga bounces off her resistance, and the
maga feels nothing beyond the warning that something has been
successfully resisted.

A normal rock turned into a large boulder by a Muto spell bounces off
her resistance, as above.

A large boulder turned into a pebble by a Muto spell bounces off her
resistance, as above.

A normal rock continuously propelled by magic stops at her skin or
clothes. The maga feels the warning that something has been resisted,
and also feels the rock touching her (before it falls), but she is not
struck by the rock. It is as if the rock had been moved up against her
as slowly and carefully as possible.

A mundane rock launched upwards by magic so that when it falls, it will
fall on the maga is not resisted. By the time it strikes the maga, its
motion is natural, due to gravity, rather than magical. However, such a
rock must be aimed (see below).

If the maga steps onto a magical bridge, it remains and will bear her
weight.

If the maga falls onto a magical bridge, she is stopped by the bridge,
and takes falling damage.

If the magical bridge falls onto the maga, it is stopped, but does her
no damage.

If a maga falls into a pit full of magical spikes, she either slides
around the spikes if there is room, or finishes lying on top of them if
there is not. She takes normal falling damage, but no damage from the
spikes.

The maga cannot see an invisible character, as the species (see
Imaginem, page @@ above) are destroyed before reaching her.

An invisible character cannot touch or exert physical force on the maga,
even if the invisibility spell had Personal Range. The maga feels the
warning that something has been resisted, but feels nothing else. See
the magical bridge examples, earlier, for further discussion.

The maga can see an illusion, as the species emitted are natural rather
than magical. She gets no indication that it an illusion.

The maga can see a magically-created object, as the object generates
normal species.

The maga sees something affected by a Rego Imaginem spell in the
location intended by the spell, as the species are no longer under
magical influence when they reach her.

An illusion cast on the maga fails.

Aiming

A maga may want to cast a spell that affects something else, and only
indirectly affects the target. In this case, the target\'s Magic
Resistance is irrelevant, as the spell does not target her. However,
while spells always hit their targets, indirect effects may not reach
the true target; they must be aimed. If a spell is resisted, as above,
it need not be aimed. If it is not resisted, it must be aimed.

**Aiming Roll: Perception + Finesse + Die**

The die is a stress die if the maga is under stress, a simple die
otherwise. Treat the total as an attack total (see Combat on page @@).
If the \'attack\' hits, the spell effect is in the right place; what
effect this has depends on the spell. The magus does not generate an
Attack Advantage even if the spell inflicts damage; the damage is
determined by rolling a stress die and adding the spell's damage bonus,
and comparing it to the targets Soak Total + stress die.

If the direct target of the spell is a basic Individual for the Form in
question (see page @@), there is no bonus to the aiming roll. For every
step larger, and thus for every magnitude added to the spell, the aiming
roll gets a +6 bonus. It is hard to miss a single person when you create
a pit the size of a church.

For extreme cases, the troupe should use its judgment and may change the
bonus. For example, a basic Individual in Auram could be a cloud 100
paces across, which should grant a large bonus to aiming, while a
gemstone created two steps larger than a basic Individual is still only
10 inches or so across, and so should probably grant no bonus at all.

The following are examples of spells that bypass the ultimate victim\'s
Magic Resistance, and thus need to be aimed.

Moving a boulder over the victim\'s head with Rego Terram, and then
dropping it.

Destroying the earth underneath her feet so that she falls into a pit.

Creating a wooden box around her so that she cannot see or move.

Changing the earth under her feet into mud, so that she sinks. Note that
she will not get muddy unless the spell penetrates her Magic Resistance,
as the mud is a magical substance which is kept away from her.

Destroying all the air around her so that she cannot breathe (briefly,
but enough to force a Concentration roll), and suffers some damage from
the surrounding air rushing in to fill the vacuum.

Projectiles and Rego Magic

The laws of physics in Mythic Europe conform to medieval ideas, not
modern ones. The differences are often unimportant, but they become
significant when a magus uses Rego spells to throw projectiles or to
drop heavy objects from a height. The physics (or \"natural philosophy\"
as characters would call it) of Mythic Europe is described in more
detail in *Art & Academe.* This insert clarifies a narrow topic: how to
use Rego spells as a form of attack.

In fact, there are three different ways Rego magic may be used
offensively.

The first way is to use magic to propel the projectile all the way to
the target. In this case, the motive force of the projectile is entirely
due to magic. Magic Resistance would protect against this form of
attack. The projectile would stop harmlessly at the edge of the
target\'s Magic Resistance. This sort of spell does not need to be
aimed.

The second form of attack is to exploit what philosophers call \"natural
motion:\" the natural tendency of heavy objects to fall downward. A
magus could use Rego magic to levitate a rock over someone\'s head and
then cancel the spell. The rock would naturally fall and would bypass
Magic Resistance. Such a spell would need to be aimed.

The third way is to use a brief jolt of magical force to hurl a
projectile as an arrow is thrown from a bow. Medieval natural philosophy
did offer an explanation for how an arrow could continue moving after it
leaves the bow. To over-simplify (in the interest of brevity), it
involves the motion of air around the arrow. Magi can devise spells that
hurl projectiles in this manner. Only specially-designed Rego spells can
throw projectiles this way --- the spell\'s description must explicitly
state that it can throw projectiles (these spells are higher magnitude
than generic Rego spells). Spells that throw a projectile release
control of it immediately after launching it. The projectile then
continues on a natural trajectory. In game terms, this means the spell
must be aimed, but the projectile bypasses Magic Resistance. The Range
of the spell need only be Touch (the magic only needs to act at the
moment the projectile is thrown), but once launched, the projectile is
subject to the natural laws of motion. The aiming roll suffers a range
penalty just like a missile weapon does (page @@) and the projectile can
go no farther than it could be thrown by a very powerful mundane bow (or
sling, catapult, or other device). Most projectiles thrown by spells
have a range increment of 20 paces.

Sigils

Every Hermetic maga has a \'wizard\'s sigil\'. All the spells that she
casts have something in common, which makes it clear to those who know
her that she was the caster. The sigil also appears in the effects of
enchanted devices created by the maga.

Some sigils affect the environment where the spell is cast. For example,
a maga might have the scent of orange blossom as her sigil. In that
case, whenever she casts a spell there is a smell of orange blossom in
the area. The spell has its effect as normal. Another maga\'s sigil
might make everyone nearby feel briefly chilled.

Other sigils affect the maga herself. For example, a sigil might make
the maga\'s hair stand on end and flash with sparks, or make her eyes
glow briefly.

Finally, some sigils affect the actual products of the spell. A maga\'s
sigil might mean that all her spell effects involve whiteness in some
way, whether white fire from Creo Ignem, or a white patch on animals
affected by Muto Animal.

Whatever the form of the sigil, it never requires requisites, as it is
part of the maga\'s magic. Accordingly, it should never be something
useful, nor something that imposes major problems. It is a bit of flavor
for the caster, nothing more.

All kinds of sigil leave some traces behind in the magic, and skilled
Hermetic investigators can use this sigil to find out who cast a spell.

Hermetic magi also have a voting sigil, a small physical object which
identifies them and is used to vote at Tribunal. This often resembles
the casting sigil in some way, but need not.

Spell Mastery

Hermetic magi can study Formulaic and Ritual spells that they know in
more detail. This study leads to spell mastery. Magi can write books
about spells they have mastered, to convey that knowledge to others. The
Spell Mastery Ability can be learned from such books according to the
normal rules for study (see page @@). Spell mastery Abilities are their
own category, and Virtues that give characters access to other
categories of Ability do not cover spell mastery Abilities. They may
only be learned by characters who use Hermetic magic to cast spells.

For every possible Hermetic spell, there is a corresponding Ability.
This Ability can be studied in the normal ways, and is called the
spell\'s mastery ability. If a maga has a score of one or greater in a
mastery ability, she is said to have mastered that spell.

**Mastery Ability: Adds to casting score and subtracts from number of
botch dice**

A maga adds her score in the mastery ability to her casting score
whenever she casts that spell. In addition, she subtracts her mastery
ability from the number of botch dice she has to roll if she rolls a
zero. This may bring the number of dice down to zero. Mastered spells
are always cast with a stress die, but if the maga is relaxed there are
no botch dice, even in a non-magic aura or when using vis, or when
casting a Ritual spell.

Mastered Spell Special Abilities

For every level in the Mastery Ability, the maga may also choose one
special ability, which applies only to that mastered spell. Thus, a maga
with a Mastery Score of two for a spell has two special abilities for
that spell. A maga who has mastered more than one spell may have
different special abilities with each of them.

Adaptive Casting

You may use your mastery score and all the special abilities associated
with it whenever you cast a similar spell (as defined in the Laboratory
chapter, page @@). If you have two or more mastery Abilities that apply
to a single spell (because you have mastered two or more spells that are
similar to the spell you are casting) you may only use the score of one
Ability, and the special abilities taken for that mastery Ability. For
example, if you have mastered Demon\'s Eternal Oblivion 30 with a score
of 3, and the abilities Adaptive, Fast Casting, and Penetration, and
Demon\'s Eternal Oblivion 25 with a score of 4 and the abilities
Adaptive, Quiet Casting twice, and Still Casting, you must use the score
of 3 if you want to use the Penetration ability, and the score of 4 if
you want to use the Still Casting ability, and you cannot use the
Penetration ability with the score of 4.

Ceremonial Casting

The maga may apply the rules for Ceremonial Casting (page @@) to casting
this spell. This special ability may not be taken for Ritual spells, as
they effectively use ceremonial casting to start with.

This special ability is not widely known in the Order, having originated
with the Cult of Mercury, but it is no longer a secret of the cult. They
know other special abilities that do remain secrets of the cult, however
(see *The Mysteries, Revised Edition,* page 117).

Fast Casting

The maga may Fast Cast the mastered spell according to the rules for
Fast Casting Spontaneous spells, on page @@. The maga still takes the
--10 penalty to Casting Score and risks the extra botch dice, although
the botch dice will be partially offset by her Mastery Ability. Any or
all of your Mastery Abilities may be applied to the spell even when it
is fast-cast, as these abilities are a fundamental part of your
understanding of the spell. This special ability may not be taken for
Ritual spells.

Imperturbable Casting

Add the caster\'s Mastery score to all Concentration rolls related to
the spell. This helps her maintain spells of Concentration Duration amid
the chaos of battle, or while casting another spell (see the
Concentration Table, page @@).

Magic Resistance

Your Magic Resistance is doubled against the mastered spell, and against
any spells or powers that count as similar. (See \'Similar Spells\',
page @@)

Multiple Casting

You can cast several copies of a single mastered spell so that it
affects more people, objects, or areas (as applicable) than normal. A
single target may also be affected more than once. You may cast a number
of additional copies of the spell equal to or less than your Mastery
Score.

All copies of the spell are cast simultaneously, and the action counts
as a single casting for the purposes of Concentration and similar
concerns. Each copy must be rolled for separately. If any of the copies
fail outright, you lose the fatigue and the copy fails, though others
may still take effect successfully. If you lose consciousness, any
copies that were successful still run their course. If you lose
consciousness and accumulate additional fatigue loss, each additional
Fatigue level causes an extra hour of unconsciousness. Any other,
special, cost associated with casting the spell must be paid for each
copy.

Subtract the total number of discrete targets from any aiming rolls that
are required. Even if all spells are directed at the same target, a --1
applies. The storyguide can further penalize or prohibit multiple
casting that is especially difficult, such as casting two spells in
opposite directions.

**Aiming: Penalty of one for every separate target, including the
first**

This special ability may be taken for Ritual spells. The casting time is
that for a single spell, but one pawn of appropriate vis per magnitude
of the spell must be expended for each copy. The normal limit on pawns
of vis expended (the maga\'s score in the Art) applies. Excess Fatigue
levels lost convert to wounds, as normal for Ritual spells.

Obfuscated Casting

Magi cannot automatically identify the Form of the spell as the magus
casts it. This makes it difficult for them to use fast-cast spells as a
defense. They must always roll to determine the Form of the spell (see
page @@) and must add the caster\'s Mastery score to the Ease Factor.

Penetration

The maga\'s Mastery Score is added to her Penetration Ability score for
determining her Penetration Bonus (see page @@).

Precise Casting

Add +1 to all Finesse rolls the caster makes with the spell, including
aiming rolls. Subtract one botch die from any Finesse rolls she makes
using the spell, to a minimum of one botch die. A maga may take this
ability multiple times for the same spell.

Quick Casting

Add +1 to the caster\'s Initiative Total when he casts the mastered
spell. If he also has the Fast Casting special ability, add +1 to his
Fast Casting Speed rolls (page @@) when he fast-casts the spell. This
ability cannot be taken for Ritual spells. A magus may take this ability
multiple times for the same spell.

Quiet Casting

The penalty for casting a spell quietly is reduced by five. This cannot
grant a bonus, although using a booming voice gives the normal bonus. A
maga may take this ability twice. If she does so, she can cast the spell
silently without penalty. The range of a Voice Range spell is still
based on the actual loudness of the maga\'s voice.

Rebuttal

This Mastery special ability may be applied to any Muto or Rego Vim
spell designed to affect a spell or power used by another being (thus
*Wizard's Boost* or *Maintain the Demanding Spell* are not eligible, but
*Mirror of Opposition \[Form\]* is). The magus may add three times his
Mastery score to the effective level of the Vim spell when determining
whether or not it can change or control the foreign magic.

Still Casting

The maga can cast the spell without gestures, at no penalty. The normal
bonus for using exaggerated gestures applies.

Unravelling

This Mastery special ability may be applied to any Perdo Vim spell
designed to weaken or destroy magic. The magus may add three times his
Mastery score to the effective level of the Perdo Vim spell when
determining whether it can destroy the targeted effect. Thus a 20th
level *Wind of Mundane Silence* cast by a character with this Mastery
special ability and a score of 3 can negate the effects of a spell if he
can double the spell's level on (29 + stress die) rather than (20 +
stress die).

Books on Spell Mastery

A book on spell Mastery can be studied by anyone who knows the spell
that the book is about. For the purposes of spell Mastery, two spells
are the same if they have the same Arts, level, Range, Duration, Target,
and effect; essentially, if the game rule versions of the two spells are
identical. Different wizard\'s sigils are not a problem.

Because magi reinvent spells for themselves, rather than actually
learning another magus\'s version, a magus studying spell Mastery from a
book may learn any special ability, not just the abilities known by the
original author. The book provides insight into the structure of the
spell, but that insight may differ slightly between the author\'s and
reader\'s versions of the spells.

Dangers

Despite the Order\'s attempts to regulate it and make it a science,
magic remains an art. No matter how skilled a practitioner you are, and
no matter what precautions you take (short of not using magic at all),
your magic will sometimes get out of your control. From the danger of
casting a spell improperly to the danger of the enigmatic Wizard\'s
Twilight, magic is filled with hazards.

Botches

The most common danger magi face when performing magic is a botch. The
results of a given spell cast under stress are not entirely predictable,
and a botch on a spell roll means that the maga has made a mistake that,
rather than just causing her spell to fail, causes her spell to produce
different effects than she intended. Though the effects of botches can
vary widely, they are almost universally detrimental. The storyguide
should use his imagination when determining botches.

As noted above (page @@), a botch automatically gives a maga a Casting
Total of zero. However, this does not mean that nothing happens; in
general, the spell still goes off. The magic is beyond the maga\'s
control; almost anything could happen. More powerful spells should have
more powerful botch results, in general, but as usual the number of
botch dice that come up zero should determine just how badly things have
gone wrong.

Magi gain one Warping Point for every zero that comes up on the botch
dice when casting a spell. (This does not include the original zero that
meant the botch dice had to be rolled. If the roll does not botch, the
magus gains no Warping Points.) If a magus gains two or more Warping
Points from a single spell botch, he may enter Wizard\'s Twilight (see
below).

Sources of Botch Dice

When casting a spell under stress, you start with one botch die, as
normal. The storyguide can increase this for all the normal reasons,
such as distractions or a difficult magical environment, but there are
several standard modifiers to the number of botch dice for spell
casting.

Using vis while casting: +1 botch die per pawn of vis used

Casting in a supernatural aura other than Magic: +1 botch die per level
of the aura, doubled if in a regio

Fast Casting: +2 botch dice

Golden Cord to a familiar: --1 botch die per level

Spell Mastery: --1 botch die per level

Note that there are a number of Virtues and Flaws that can modify both
the number of botch dice, and what they mean. For example, the Faerie
Magic Virtue attunes Merinita magi to Faerie auras, so that they do not
gain additional botch dice in them.

If the maga is relaxed while casting a Formulaic spell, then there are
no botch dice, no matter how many the circumstances would normally add.
Note that it is not possible to be relaxed while casting a fatiguing
Spontaneous spell, as the process itself is stressful. Ritual spells
also require botch dice in all circumstances, unless the maga has
mastered them.

Botch Suggestions

Attract unwanted attention: The attention of someone or something,
perhaps the target of your spell, is drawn to you.

Caster addled: You are rendered insane, confused, or demented. You
acquire the Flaw Simple-Minded for an indefinite duration.

Caster overwhelmed: You are overwhelmed by your own magic. Make a
Stamina stress roll of 6+ or be knocked unconscious.

Connection with target: Your target becomes aware of your
investigations, and may learn something about you through the arcane
link that is temporarily established.

Debilitating: The spell pushes the target too hard and does permanent
damage: for example, a Rego Animal spell might forever leave a beast
without its natural instincts and urges.

Flawed creation: A creation is heavily flawed, though the flaw may not
be obvious until the creation is expected to serve the function it was
created for.

Incomplete or improper effect: For example, a spell intended to
transform you into a wolf might only transform your head and hands.

Out of control: The spell creates or calls forth something beyond the
caster\'s ability to control.

Related but unwanted effect: For example, a spell intended to transform
you into a wolf might turn you into another animal.

Reverse effect: The spell does exactly the opposite of what is intended.

Spell affects caster: You, instead of the intended target, are affected.

Too powerful: The spell does more than it should and thereby causes
problems.

Undying spell: The spell does not end at the normal time, and it proves
resistant to being dispelled.

Wrong target: Pick a new one at random.

Warping

Warping affects everyone, not just Hermetic magi, so it is described in
the Saga chapter, page @@. Note that magi gain one Warping Point for
every zero on the botch dice when they botch a spell.

Wizard\'s Twilight

Wizard\'s Twilight is unique to Hermetic magic. Most magical traditions
have a unique reaction to Warping, and Wizard\'s Twilight is the
reaction of magi trained in the Hermetic tradition.

Entering Twilight

Whenever a maga gains two or more Warping Points from a single event,
rather than from prolonged exposure, she must add them to her current
total, possibly increasing her Warping Score, and then roll to avoid
Twilight.

**Twilight Avoidance: Stamina + Concentration + Vim Form Bonus + stress
die vs. Warping Score + Number of Warping Points gained + Enigmatic
Wisdom + local aura + stress die (no botch)**

If the roll succeeds, the maga spends two minutes (one Diameter)
bringing her magic under control, but there are no further effects. If
the roll fails, the maga enters Wizard\'s Twilight. If the maga botches,
she enters Twilight and cannot comprehend the experience.

A maga may choose not to resist Twilight, in which case she makes no
roll and automatically enters Twilight. In some situations, such as
combat, taking two minutes to control the magic may be very dangerous,
and in such cases a maga may wish to enter Twilight in the hope of
comprehending it and thus getting through the experience more quickly.

Comprehending Twilight

A maga within Twilight must comprehend her surroundings in order to get
out.

**Twilight Comprehension: Intelligence + Enigmatic Wisdom + stress die
vs. Warping Score + stress die**

**Botch Dice: 1 + 1 per Warping Point gained to trigger the Twilight**

The time that a maga feels that she spends in Twilight is completely
independent of time passing in the real world. The time that passes in
the real world depends on the maga\'s Warping Score, and the success of
her Twilight Comprehension roll.

Warping Score Base Time in Twilight

1 Diameter (2 minutes)

2 Two Hours

3 Sun

4 Day (24 hours)

5 Moon

6 Season

7 Year

8 Seven Years

9 Seven plus a Stress Die Years (no botch)

10+ Eternal: Final Twilight

If the comprehension roll botches, the time the maga spends in Twilight
one step longer on the table for every zero on the dice, and she suffers
a bad effect from the experience.

If the comprehension roll fails, the maga spends the base time in
Twilight, and suffers a bad effect from the experience.

If the Twilight side of the comprehension roll botches (same botch dice
as the maga\'s side), the maga need only beat a total of zero to
comprehend the Twilight. The botch has no other effect. This means that,
all else being equal, a maga is slightly more likely to comprehend a
Twilight caused by gaining a lot of Warping Points.

If the comprehension roll succeeds, subtract the maga\'s Enigmatic
Wisdom score from the result, and compare that total (that is, the
maga\'s Intelligence plus the stress die result) to the Twilight\'s
result.

**Twilight Time: Intelligence + stress die vs. Warping Score + stress
die**

**Note: The die rolls are the rolls already made to comprehend the
Twilight**

If the two match exactly, or the maga\'s score is lower, the maga spends
the base time in Twilight. For every additional point by which the
maga\'s score exceeds the Twilight result, move one step shorter on the
duration table. For example, if a maga with a Warping score of 7 makes
her comprehension roll by three points, the Twilight lasts a day. If
this lowers the duration below Diameter, the whole Twilight lasts a mere
moment in the real world.

During Twilight

The experiences of magae in Twilight vary enormously. Some experience a
dreamlike copy of the real world. Others encounter strange creatures, or
copies of themselves, or feel an infinite benevolence watching over the
universe, or an infinite malevolence likewise. These may be played out
if desired.

The effects are equally varied in the outside world. The simplest effect
is that the maga falls unconscious until she emerges from the Twilight.
This is most common with low Warping scores. Magae with moderate Warping
Scores often seem to resist Twilight, but act without real initiative.
They are easily led while in this state, and have no memory of their
actions when the Twilight finishes. Magae with high Warping Scores
sometimes disappear physically into the Twilight Void. If they do so,
their bodies reappear in the same place, near enough, when they come out
of Twilight.

If the maga\'s body remains in the real world while she is in Twilight,
it is completely immune to magic, mundane damage, aging, and hunger. In
many ways it seems to be outside the world although it still appears
within it. A maga\'s body is also unable to perform magic while she is
in Twilight.

While these are the most common effects, others have been observed.
Bjornaer often take the form of their heartbeasts, and Flambeau magi
have been known to turn into large fires which burn without fuel.

Effects of Twilight

Every Twilight experience marks the maga. The strength of the mark is
random. Roll a simple die. The maga gains that many Warping Points, in
addition to the points that triggered the Twilight.

If the maga comprehended the Twilight, the effects are good.

Twilight Scar: Something minor and magical, and also neutral or
beneficial. For example, the area around the maga always smells faintly
and pleasantly of roses, the maga\'s eyes glitter with many colors, the
maga walks a fraction of an inch above any surface. In the case of a
maga who wants to keep her magic inconspicuous, the effect may not be
obviously magical: people around her become slightly more cheerful,
insects don\'t bite her, and so on.

In addition, the storyguide should pick one of the following effects:

Increased Knowledge: A number of experience points in an Art, Magic
Theory, or Enigmatic Wisdom, equal to twice the number of Warping Points
gained.

New Hermetic or Supernatural Virtue: Minor (if between 7 and 10 Warping
Points, inclusive), or major (if more than ten Warping Points). Virtues
cannot be gained if the maga gains fewer than seven Warping Points.

New Spell: The maga knows a new Formulaic or Ritual spell, with a
magnitude equal to the number of Warping Points gained. This spell is
chosen by the storyguide, and the maga need not be able to cast it. She
may write a Lab Text about it as normal.

If the maga failed to comprehend the Twilight, the effects are bad.

Twilight Scar: Something minor, magical, and annoying. For example, the
area around the maga smells faintly of sulfur, the maga\'s touch stains
skin black (it washes off, with effort), the maga\'s footprints create
myriads of fine cracks in any surface. At the storyguide\'s discretion,
a maga who tries to keep her magic inconspicuous might get a scar she
can hide. For example, the smell of iron makes her feel nauseous, or
insects always bite her given the chance.

In addition, the storyguide should pick one of the following effects:

Lost Knowledge: Lose two experience points for every Warping Point
gained in an Art, Magic Theory, or Enigmatic Wisdom. This cannot reduce
the score below zero.

New Hermetic or Supernatural Flaw: Minor (if between 7 and 10 Warping
Points, inclusive) or major (if 10 Warping Points or above). The maga
can only gain a Flaw if she gains at least seven Warping Points.

Lost Spells: The maga loses the knowledge of spells, chosen by the
storyguide, with magnitudes totaling the number of Warping Points
gained.

Twilight Example

Darius of Flambeau, played by Niall, botches a spell while hunting a
Renounced magus. There are two zeroes on the botch dice, so he gains 2
Warping Points, and must check for Twilight. Darius has a Warping Score
of 6, and his enemy is not immediately present, so he chooses to try to
resist the Twilight.

As a member of House Flambeau, Darius does not have an Enigmatic Wisdom
score, so that doesn\'t affect anything.

Darius has a Stamina of 0, Concentration 3, and a Vim bonus of 2. He
thus gets +5 to his roll to resist the Twilight, and Niall rolls a six
on the stress die, for a total of 11. Not bad, but not great.

The Ease Factor is 6 (for his Warping Score) +2 (the number of points
gained) + 4 (for the local Faerie aura, a major contributor to the botch
in the first place), or 12 + a stress die, no botch. The storyguide
doesn\'t bother rolling; even if he rolls a zero Darius has failed to
resist and will enter Twilight.

When it comes to comprehending the Twilight, Darius gets his
Intelligence, +3, plus a stress die.

The Twilight has a base of 6, Darius\'s Warping Score, plus a stress
die. Niall rolls a 7, but the storyguide rolls a 5. Darius has a total
of 10, and the Twilight has a total of 11. Darius has failed to
comprehend it.

The comprehension roll simply failed, so Darius spends the base time in
Twilight, and has a bad experience. At a Warping Score of 6, the base
time is one season.

The storyguide rules that Darius feels his magic destroying his body and
mind from the inside. He can\'t tell how long it takes, although he is
fully aware of every step of the process, and as the last trace of his
awareness is about to vanish, he comes out of the Twilight. To the
outside world, Darius\'s body appeared to dry up and decay to dust over
the course of a few seconds. At the end of a season, Darius reappears,
and finds that two of the covenant grogs have been camping here to see
whether he was coming back from Twilight.

The simple die for additional Warping Points is a one, so Darius gains
three Warping Points in total. He loses six experience points in Corpus,
two for each of the three Warping Points he gained. He didn\'t gain
enough Warping Points to gain a Flaw. He also gains a Twilight Scar, and
the storyguide rules that any dead meat Darius is touching looks,
tastes, and smells rotten, although the effect passes when he releases
it, and the meat is actually perfectly good. It looks like Darius will
be becoming a vegetarian.

Certamen

Certamen (Care-TAH-men, Latin for \"duel\") is the ceremony by which two
magi conduct a magical duel. It serves as a nonlethal way for one magus
to establish dominance and precedence over another, and has formal
restrictions to keep it from disrupting the unity of the Order.

The most important is that certamen cannot be used to over-rule a
Tribunal, require a violation of the Code, or require a magus to
overlook a violation of the Code. Beyond that, however, certamen can be
used to settle any dispute, and the result of the certamen is binding.

One need not accept a challenge to certamen, but that is the same as
conceding defeat. You may challenge anyone to certamen over a certain
issue once, but the Peripheral Code prohibits you from challenging the
same person again over that issue unless he challenges you in the
meantime. If another issue comes up, you may challenge him again.
Bullying magi with certamen is a Low Crime in almost all Tribunals.
Certamen is solely an institution of the Order of Hermes; non-Hermetic
wizards do not have the ability to participate in the ceremony, as it
relies heavily on the Hermetic Arts.

Both participants specify in advance what the other magus will do, or
refrain from doing, if he loses. The two requirements are expected to be
symmetrical, and Tribunals do over-ride the results on asymmetric
certamens. This gives magi some motivation not to bully with certamen;
even the greatest archmage can botch.

To engage in certamen, you and the other magus must agree on one Form
and Technique combination you will both use. By tradition, the aggressor
in the duel chooses the Technique and the defender chooses the Form, and
it is considered good form to go along with this choice. However, each
magus may veto the other magus\'s first choice. If he does so, he must
accept the second option.

Once the Technique and Form are chosen, you and your opponent
concentrate for a moment, both entering trances. While entranced,
competing magi have no defense against physical attacks. Each becomes
attuned to the magical forces surrounding them, shaping them into
phantasms representing the Technique and Form of the duel. If the
Technique and Form are Muto and Animal, the phantasms might be two
animals, one controlled by each magus. During the course of the duel,
each animal changes into various other animals in an effort to defeat
the other. A Creo Ignem contest could consist of two fiery beings
fighting. In an Intellego Aquam contest it might appear that the
combatants are in hazy water, each trying to reach some goal. The
illusionary battle is a representation of the more subtle magical battle
which affects the minds of the combatants.

Mechanical resolution of certamen is based on six totals.

**Initiative Total: Quickness + Finesse + Stress Die**

**Attack Total: Presence + Technique or Form + Stress Die**

**Defense Total: Perception + Form or Technique + Stress Die**

**Attack Advantage: Attack Total - Defense Total (if Attack Total is
higher)**

**Weakening Total: Intelligence + Penetration + Attack Advantage**

**Resistance Total: Stamina + Parma Magica**

Initiative is rolled only once, at the beginning of the duel. This
initiative is the same as combat initiative (see page @@), and if a
certamen is taking place during combat each magus acts at the point in
the sequence determined by his initiative total.

On his action, a magus rolls a stress die to generate an Attack Total.
His opponent rolls a stress die to generate a Defense Total. Unlike
initiative, the dice for attack and defense are rolled every round. If
the Defense Total equals or exceeds the Attack Total, the attack does no
damage. If the Attack Total exceeds the Defense Total, the amount by
which it does so is the Attack Advantage.

Each magus must use both the Technique and the Form in each round of
certamen, using one for Attack and the other for Defense. The two magi
may use different Arts from each other for Attack or Defense, and may
change which Art they apply to which total from round to round.

Subtract the defender\'s Resistance Total from the Weakening Total. For
every five points or fraction left over, the defender loses a Fatigue
level. Note that the magus\'s Parma Magica score is added to the
Resistance Total; it is not multiplied by five as it is for magic
resistance.

**Weakening Total - Resistance Total Fatigue Levels Lost**

0 None

1--5 1

6--10 2

11--15 3

16--20 4

21--25 5

26--30 6

etc.

Certamen itself never causes wounds, merely exhaustion. If you lose more
Fatigue levels than you have, you spend one more hour unconscious for
every additional level lost.

You can use raw vis at any time during certamen, even if your opponent
doesn\'t use it or doesn\'t expect its use. For every pawn you expend,
add 2 to your Attack Total or Defense Total for one round only. Raw vis
used must be attuned to the Art used for Attack or Defense in the duel.
The number of pawns you can use in one round is limited to your score in
the Form or Technique the vis is attuned to.

All members of House Tremere have a Minor Magical Focus with Certamen.
This means that they always double the lower of the Technique and Form
when engaged in certamen. Other Magical Foci do not apply.

There are three ways to win certamen. The first involves wearing your
opponent down until he falls unconscious. When this happens, the victor
is entitled to cast a single spell at the loser. This spell, which must
be of the same Technique and Form as the contest, circumvents the
loser\'s Parma Magica (though the loser still gets Magic Resistance
based on the Form of the spell). In most certamen contests, this
\"free\" spell is unnecessary, because your opponent\'s collapse already
designates your victory. However, some duelists use it anyway to
intimidate and embarrass those who fight them. This free spell can be
used to harm your fallen opponent, but remember, certamen is intended to
be a harmless way to resolve disputes, and the winner is still bound by
the Hermetic Code.

The second way to win certamen is by surrender. If your opponent
realizes he is outmatched, or wants to walk away from the duel, he can
concede the contest. Such a submission means that the loser is still
capable of defending himself, so he has full Parma Magica and Magic
Resistance against any final spell cast at him.

The third way to win certamen is to maintain concentration in the face
of distraction when your opponent does not. Concentration rolls are not
necessitated by the loss of Fatigue levels during certamen. Sometimes,
however, conditions surrounding the duel necessitate that the duelists
make Concentration rolls. If one of the duelists fails a Concentration
roll, the fight ends. The duelist\'s loss of concentration causes his
phantasm to disappear, indicating the opponent\'s victory. A victor
through loss of concentration does not get a free spell.

Loss of concentration, however, does not necessarily mean that certamen
is over and that a victor is decided. If the victor under these
circumstances refuses the honor, and the combatant who lost
concentration agrees, the battle may resume until a clear victor
emerges. A magus might refuse a victory by loss of concentration for
reasons of honor, or because he intends to do more harm.

Certamen Example

Moratamis of Guernicus harbors suspicions about what Carolus of Tytalus
gets up to at night. She asks him to tell her what he is doing, and he
refuses. She doesn\'t have enough for an official Quaesitorial
investigation, so she challenges him to certamen, demanding that he tell
her what he has done if he loses. Carolus agrees, with the condition
that Moratamis will not ask him about his activities again unless she is
on official Quaesitorial business. (He has to add the condition,
although he would prefer not to, or else the Tribunal is unlikely to
uphold a result in his favor.) Carolus suspects he will lose, as
Moratamis is older and thus more powerful.

Moratamis\'s Arts are: Cr 1, In 12, Mu 1, Pe 7, Re 8; An 5, Aq 0, Au 0,
Co 5, He 0, Ig 0, Im 10, Me 13, Te 0, Vi 5

Her Characteristics are: Int +2, Per +3, Pre +2, Com +1, Str -2, Sta +1,
Dex --2, Qik --1

Her relevant Abilities are: Finesse 2, Parma Magica 5, Penetration 3.

Carolus\'s Arts are: Cr 2, In 0, Mu 5, Pe 10, Re 7; An 3, Aq 0, Au 0, Co
5, He 0, Ig 0, Im 10, Me 7, Te 6, Vi 4

His Characteristics are: Int +2, Per --1, Pre --1, Com --1, Str 0, Sta
+1, Dex +4, Qik 0

His relevant Abilities are: Finesse 2, Parma Magica 3, Penetration 1.

Moratamis challenged, so she picks the Technique. She is fairly sure
that the only Technique she is much better at is Intellego, and she\'s
also sure that Carolus knows this too. She thinks that her scores in
Rego and Creo are fairly balanced with Carolus\'s, though. She knows
that, if she proposes Intellego first, Carolus will veto it. On the
other hand, if she proposes Rego first, Carolus might have other reasons
to veto that, and thus let her use Intellego. Thus, she proposes Rego.

Carolus accepts, knowing full well that he\'ll be stuck with Intellego
if he doesn\'t. For the Form, he proposes Imaginem. He knows that
Moratamis studies that, but also that he has a reputation as a bit of an
Imaginem specialist. He hopes that she\'ll think he thinks he has an
advantage she doesn\'t know about. It works; Moratamis vetoes his first
choice. Carolus then settles on Terram, where he is fairly sure he is
better.

The two now have the following statistics:

Moratamis: Initiative: +1 (Qik --1 + Finesse 2), Attack: +10 (Rego: Rego
8 + Pre +2) or +2 (Terram: Terram 0 + Pre +2), Defense +11 (Rego: Rego
8 + Per +3) or +3 (Terram: Terram 0 + Per +3), Weakening +5 (Int +2 +
Penetration 3), Resistance +6 (Sta +1 + Parma Magica 5)

Carolus: Initiative: +2 (Qik 0 + Finesse 2), Attack +6 (Rego: Rego 7 +
Pre --1) or +5 (Terram: Terram 6 + Pre --1), Defense +6 (Rego: Rego 7 +
Per --1) or +5 (Terram: Terram 6 + Per --1), Weakening +3 (Int +2 +
Penetration 1), Resistance +4 (Sta +1 + Parma Magica 3)

The phantasms for the contest are the stones of the floor under their
feet, which try to rise up and engulf them.

The two roll Initiative. Moratamis rolls a 2, for a total of 3, and
Carolus rolls a 5, for a total of 7. Carolus acts first.

On the first round, Carolus chooses to put Rego into attack and Terram
into defense, while Moratamis chooses to defend with Rego and attack
with Terram. Carolus attacks first, and rolls a 12 (lucky!), for an
Attack Total of 18. Moratamis rolls a 7, for a Defense Total of 18. On a
dead heat, the defender wins, and Carolus cannot get through. Then
Moratamis attacks. She rolls a 5, for a total of 7, while Carolus rolls
a 2, also for a total of 7. Another dead heat, so nothing happens. The
stones jump around a bit, but nothing happens.

On the next round, Moratamis switches her Arts, in the hope of breaking
through Carolus\'s defenses. Carolus still attacks first, and rolls a
10, for an Attack Total of 16. Moratamis rolls a zero, but doesn\'t
botch, for a Defense Total of 3. Carolus has an Attack Advantage of 13.
This adds to his Weakening Score of +3, for a Weakening Total of 16.
Moratamis subtracts her Resistance of 6, so the final damage is 10.
Moratamis thus loses two Fatigue levels, giving her a --1 penalty on
Attack and Defense.

On her attack, Moratamis rolls a 2, for an Attack Total of 11, including
the --1 penalty. Carolus rolls a 6, for a Defense Total of 11. Thanks to
having already weakened Moratamis, he beats off the attack. The stones
have climbed up to around Moratamis\'s knees.

Moratamis decides that her switch of strategy was a mistake, and
switches back. Carolus rolls a 20 (lucky again!) for an Attack Total of
26. Moratamis rolls an 8, for a Defense Total of 18. Carolus has an
Attack Advantage of 8, which translates into a single Fatigue level
lost. Moratamis now has a --3 penalty to Attack and Defense.

She rolls a 7, which gives her an Attack Total of 6. Carolus rolls a 4,
for a Defense Total of 9, easily safe.

Moratamis is now hoping for a lucky break, and Carolus only rolls a 6,
for an Attack Total of 12. Moratamis rolls a 6, for a Defense Total of
14, including the penalty. She is safe this round. For her
counterattack, she rolls a 5, for an Attack Total of 4. Carolus rolls a
zero, but doesn\'t botch, and still has a Defense Total of 5. He is
safe, and the stones are swarming up around Moratamis\'s waist.

The next round remains evenly balanced, neither magus managing to weaken
the other. In the following round, Carolus rolls a 9, for an Attack
Total of 15, while Moratamis only manages a 4, for a Defense Total of
12. This gives Carolus a Weakening Total of 6, which Moratamis is just
able to resist. Still, she feels it.and a few stones boil up to her
chest for a moment. She rolls a 7 for her attack, for an Attack Total of
6. Carolus rolls a 6, for a Defense Total of 11, and easily blocks the
thrust.

In the next round, Carolus rolls a 10, for a total of 16, while
Moratamis rolls a 0, but doesn\'t botch, for a Defense Total of 8. This
gives Carolus a final advantage of 2 points, enough to clip a further
Fatigue level from Moratamis. Now that she has a penalty of --5 to
Attack and Defense, she decides that she cannot win, and concedes the
contest so that Carolus cannot cast a spell on her. Carolus goes off
feeling that he wriggled out of that one quite nicely, and Moratamis
turns her attention to other matters.

Mysteries

Mysteries are paths to greater magical power requiring sacrifices beyond
the time for study. Many magi within the Order of Hermes pursue
mysteries, and four of the Houses are Mystery Cults --- organizations
that teach a mystery. Extensive details on the mysteries of the Hermetic
Houses are given in *Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults,* while *The
Mysteries Revised Edition* gives extensive information on other
mysteries found within the Order of Hermes. This section provides
information about the outermost layer of the House mysteries, and one of
the deeper mysteries for each House. Player characters in the Mystery
Cult Houses are Initiated into the Outer Mystery as apprentices, but
must seek Initiation into deeper mysteries in play. Rules for Mystery
Initiation are given in the Long-Term Events chapter, on page @@.

Bjornaer --- The Heartbeast

Bjornaer magi can take the form of a single mundane creature. This is
usually an animal or bird, but it can be a plant. The heartbeast is
always a living thing, and usually a noble creature. No known magus has
had an earthworm heartbeast, for example. A maga\'s heartbeast displays
a central aspect of her nature, so that her personality, even in human
form, will resemble that of the creature. Initiates of the Bjornaer
mystery gain the Ability Heartbeast. This Ability cannot be gained by
any character who has not been Initiated into the mystery. For Initiates
of the Outer Mystery, the Heartbeast Ability is only used when something
tries to stop the magus changing forms. In that case, a roll of
Stamina + Heartbeast against an Ease Factor set by the storyguide allows
the character to change anyway.

A Bjornaer maga can only change into one kind of animal, and that kind
cannot be altered by Hermetic magic. The transformed Bjornaer can be
changed, by Muto Animal magic, for example, but the kind of animal that
her heartbeast is cannot be changed. A Bjornaer maga really is her
heartbeast, and so remaining in that form does not count as being under
an active mystical effect (see Warping, page @@). Of course, she is
really human as well, so remaining human does not cause Warping either.
Hermetic magic is unable to tell whether an animal is actually a
Bjornaer, and the same applies to most other kinds of magic. (This
assumes that the maga is trying to hide her nature, of course.) As a
result, a Bjornaer in animal form is affected by Animal spells, not
Corpus or Mentem spells. Spells already in effect before the
transformation remain in effect, however.

Bjornaer magi can cast spells while in the form of their heartbeast, but
they cannot speak or make the appropriate gestures, and thus normally
take a --15 penalty.

The transformation takes only a moment, and affects only the maga. None
of her possessions are transformed. A Bjornaer who has been physically
changed by magic may try to assume her normal form or her heartbeast
form. She must roll Stamina + Heartbeast against an Ease Factor set by
the storyguide. As a rule of thumb, 3 + the magnitude of the
transforming magic is a reasonable number. If she does resume one of her
natural forms, the other magic is dispelled.

Bjornaer magi do not treat physical transformations as major magical
effects for the purposes of gaining Warping Points. However, a magical
transformation which is maintained over time will grant one Warping
Point per year, as it is still a continuing mystical effect.

Finally, Bjornaer magi cannot bind familiars. The reasons for this are
debated, but the fact is uncontroversial.

Ringing the Changes

There are three basic types of shapechangers in Mythic Europe, and they
have different responses to magic due to their natures.

The use of a spell or invested item to change shape (including those
with the Skinchanger Virtue) does not change the basic underlying fact
that the target is human. While he may be affected by Animal spells, he
may also be affected by Corpus and Mentem spells, and any ongoing magics
using these Forms cast prior to transformation remain in effect. The
transformation magic is bound by a duration, during which time the spell
or effect may be detected with Intellego Vim spells. The Penetration
Total of the caster must exceed the Magic Resistance of anyone that the
shapechanged human wishes to touch (or attack). Furthermore, remaining
in this form may incur Warping.

Those who have an innate supernatural power to change shape (represented
by Virtues or Flaws such as Shapeshifter and Lycanthrope) only invoke a
magical effect at the moment of transformation. Thus the shapechange is
not an active effect all the time that character is in animal form.
Consequentially, Penetration is not required for mundane attacks, nor
does the creature radiate magic or suffer warping due to the
transformation. However, this type of shapechanger is still a human in
an animal shape, and so Corpus and Mentem magics are effective, as are
Animal spells. An exception is the lycanthrope, who do not retain his
human mind when transformed, and therefore cannot be affected by Mentem
spells, although Corpus spells still work.

The Heartbeast is the most total transformation of the three; unlike the
other two, the Bjornaer magus does not merely take the physical
characteristics (the 'accidents') of an animal shape; he actually
becomes the animal in question. Despite retaining his human
intelligence, he cannot be affected by Mentem or Corpus magics while in
heartbeast form. Spells already in effect before the transformation
remain in effect, however. Similarly, Animal spells cast on the
heartbeast remain in effect after transformation to human form. As with
shapeshifters, there is no ongoing magic beyond the moment of
transformation.

Secret Name (Minor House Mystery)

This mystery permanently severs the sympathetic resonances of the
magus\'s name, and forges them anew with a name known only to the
Mystagogue and the Initiate. All Arcane Connections to the magus which
date from before the ritual immediately expire upon its completion, and
all Sympathetic Connections become invalid. The magus produces new
Arcane Connections after the ritual has taken place, but no Sympathetic
Connection will ever work against him again, even if created after the
ritual. The Mystagogue provides a secret name which allows the magus to
work magic upon himself; without this he would not be able to use the
Personal Range. However, anyone knowing the secret name --- such as the
Mystagogue, or wizards who know the mystery of Synthemata Magic (see
*The Mysteries Revised Edition*) --- need not subtract the spell level
from the Penetration total of any spells cast against the target, much
like the Weak Magic Resistance Flaw. Clan Ilfetu considers these secret
names to be a sacred trust, and has never been suspected of misusing
them.

The Initiate chooses a new public name as well as receiving the secret
one. There is inevitably a time of confusion while sodales get used to
referring to the magus by his new public name, but this is part of the
symbolic sacrifice of this Mystery. This Mystery can benefit any person
(Gifted or not) who possesses Magic Resistance, and those few magi
outside the House who learn of it occasionally ask the House to perform
it on their behalf.

The Initiation of this Mystery fails if the magus has a Talisman or a
Familiar; these enchantments form too great a tie to the magus\'s past
identity to be broken by the Initiation process.

**Initiation of Secret Name**

**Ease Factor**: 15 (Minor Virtue known to the Mystagogue)

**Script Bonus**: +8

**Script Details**: On the anniversary of the Initiate\'s birth, the
Mystagogue and the Initiate enter a round tent which has been set up on
an ancestor site (+3) and perform a ritual cleansing together which must
end at the hour of the Initiate\'s birth (+2); Initiate acquires a minor
version of the Weak Magic Resistance Flaw (+3 for Minor Ordeal).

Criamon --- The Enigma

No-one outside House Criamon really understands what their mystery is
about. All Criamon magi have a score of one in the Ability Enigmatic
Wisdom, and may place experience points in it at character creation.
This Ability assists with the comprehension of Wizard\'s Twilight, but
it also makes the experience more likely (see page @@). Characters may
not learn Enigmatic Wisdom without being initiated into the mystery of
the Enigma.

**Enigmatic Wisdom:** A far-reaching perception of strange and baffling
phenomena that helps you understand their nature, though you may seem
strange or even ludicrous to the uninitiated. Your score in this Ability
is added to rolls to interpret dreams and riddles, and to understand
phantasms and arcane or mysterious situations. Thanks to this Ability,
Criamon magi go into Wizard\'s Twilight (see page @@) more often, but
survive it better than most. Specialties: interpreting signs, explaining
the Enigma, Twilight.

As described earlier, the mysteries of House Criamon are divided into
several Paths. The earliest step on the Path of the Body is described
here, and the rest of the major Paths are described in *Houses of
Hermes: Mystery Cults.*

The Path of the Body

The Path of the Body focuses on the human form. Some Criamon magi
believe that the human body and the universe reflect each other
structurally, so that knowing the body illuminates the prison of time.
Others enhance the body, as a tool, and as a vehicle for escape from the
universe. The Criamon Path of the Body is in many ways the inverse of
Hermetic alchemy, which assumes the universe is perfect and a magus who
reflects it perfectly will become immortal. Criamon magi assume that the
universe, like each body, is inevitably decaying.

An unusually large proportion of the Primi of the House followed this
Path. The followers of the Path of the Body tend toward practical,
useful insights. Primi who have achieved the Microcosmic Station on this
path are active administrators under whom the House co-ordinates its
ventures effectively.

The Avenue of Subduing the Meat and the Station of the Perfect Tool

Several ritual investitures assist magi to find the first Station of the
Body, each descended from a different tradition of mystics adopted into
the early House. Those following this Avenue develop control over their
body\'s desires and distractions, usually through painful
mortifications, or fatiguing exertions, that last a year. A handful of
magi have followed this avenue by being transformed into plants for a
year. The Avenue ends with a guide acting as midwife for a symbolic
rebirth.

At the first Station of the Path of the Body, the magus realizes that
the body is the perfect tool for Hermetic magic, because it is adapted
for magic, and magic, in turn, is adapted for it. The magus\'s close
inspection of the body allows the development of Minor Potency in an
aspect of the Art of Corpus. Magi who have found this Station see the
intrinsic links between the body and the magical energies it wields, and
so can use their understanding of magical events to minister to the
body. They may use their Enigmatic Wisdom score in place of Chirurgy and
Medicine in rolls. They also know, instinctively, if their body is ill,
and where, although they may not know the appropriate treatment.

Initiates of this station are bound by the lifestyle of the House (Vow)
and find it more difficult to use their magic when their body is ill
(Deleterious Circumstances). Some illnesses do not block certain
mystical effects: the usual example given is that fevers do not restrict
Ignem spells, because they are caused by a surplus of fiery humors.
Wounds do not prevent magic use, of themselves, but open the body to
infections, which may.

**Initiation of The Avenue of Subduing the Meat, which reaches the
Station of the Perfect Tool**

**Ease Factor:** 21, as Major Virtue (Minor Potency in an aspect of
Corpus, may use Enigmatic Wisdom in lieu of Medicine and Chirurgy.)

**Script Bonus:** +15:

**Script Details:** Major Ordeal, constructed of three minor flaws (Vow
-- to not pollute the body and use it aptly, Deleterious Circumstances
-- while ill, Disfigured -- stigmata) +9, Sympathetic Bonus (a complete
year cycle as a plant, or similar) +3, Special time and place (Symbolic
rebirth) +3.

Merinita --- Faerie Magic

A character may not be Initiated into this mystery unless she has been
touched by the fay.

A character is touched by the fay if the powers of faerie have
interfered with her life in a substantial fashion. Anyone with a Virtue
or Flaw related to the fay qualifies, as does anyone who has gained a
Warping Point from a faerie source. Merinita characters without a faerie
Virtue or Flaw start with one Warping Point, caused by their parens to
qualify them for the mystery.

Characters initiated into Faerie Magic are attuned to both Magical and
Faerie auras, and so gain Warping Points from neither. Further, they
gain full benefit from both kinds of aura, and do not gain additional
botch dice from either. Magic cast by these magi counts as a fay power,
so anyone who gains a Warping Point from one of their spells can be
initiated into the Mystery.

Initiates of the Outer Mystery gain access to special Ranges, Durations,
and Targets. They may use these with Spontaneous, Ritual, and Formulaic
magic, although some of them require Ritual magic. Spells created using
these parameters can only be learned by characters with Faerie Magic.

**Road** (Range)**:** The maga may target anyone or anything on the same
road or path as her. The identity of roads and paths is not always
clear, and the troupe must decide if things are difficult. Two paths may
cross each other, but two paths may not become one. In that case, either
one path joins the second, or the junction is actually the joining of
three paths. The maga need not be able to see her target, but she must
be able to sense it somehow, unless the spell is an Intellego effect
intended to find out if something is there.

People are only on a road if they are actually between the edges of the
path, at least partially. Buildings are on a road if the primary access
to the building is from that road. Plants and small objects must be
between the edges of the path.

For the purposes of spell level calculation, Road is the same level of
range as Voice.

**Bargain** (Duration): A spell with Bargain duration can only be cast
on someone who has just concluded a bargain or agreement with the maga.
The maga\'s Penetration total is doubled, and if the spell Penetrates
the target\'s Magic Resistance, nothing happens unless the target breaks
the bargain. If he does, the spell takes effect without the need to
bypass Magic Resistance again. Bargain spells have a second duration
which determines how long the spell lasts after it takes effect. To
calculate the level of a Bargain spell, calculate the level of the spell
that takes effect when the bargain is broken, and add three magnitudes.
The spell can only enforce a bargain for a maximum of a Year.

**Fire** (Duration): Spells with this duration can only be cast on
fires, and they last until the fire targeted goes out. Because the fire
is the target, the form of the spell must be Ignem or Imaginem. It is
possible that the spell could persist indefinitely if the fire is
carefully maintained. Fire is the same level of duration as Moon.

**Until (Condition)** (Duration): The spell lasts until some condition
is met, such as speaking the name of God, or some item is touched with
iron, or until a word in a list is said out of place (the days of the
week are spoken out of order, for example). Until (Condition) is the
same level of duration as Year, and also requires a Ritual spell. Until
(Condition) spells cannot normally be dispelled by magic unless that is
part of the condition. The ending condition must be specified when the
spell is cast. Spells with this duration expire if the caster passes
into Twilight, even temporarily, and also expire when the caster or
primary target dies.

**Year + 1** (Duration): The spell lasts for a year and a day. This is
the same level of duration as Year, and also requires a ritual, but the
duration is determined by the actual time that passes, rather than by
the turning of the seasons; the spell ends at the same time of day as
when it was cast, a year and a day later. Year + 1 spells can be
dispelled according to the normal rules.

**Bloodline** (Target): A bloodline is all the people descended by blood
from a given person, the immediate target. Only the immediate target
need be within the spell\'s range, but all members of the bloodline are
affected immediately. Spouses do not count as part of the bloodline. The
spell applies to all members of the bloodline born during its duration,
as well as those already living when it is cast. As with all spells that
target multiple people, every individual gets Magic Resistance, if
applicable. The category is the same level as Structure. It is possible
to design a spell with Bloodline target so that it does not warp any
members of a particular bloodline (see Warping, page @@).

**Faerie Magic**

Faerie Magic is an Arcane Ability learned after Merinitae Initiate the
Outer Mystery of Faerie Magic, which represents how their magic differs
from normal Hermetic magic. This includes applying faerie thinking to
arcane activities, usually by drawing out sympathetic connections
between magical and mundane things.

These mystic relationships may be integrated into casting tools that
Merinitae often use with their spells, called **charms** (see sidebar).
These are symbolic representations designed to highlight a particular
quality of the target that always involve some sort of artistic ability.
They may be used to increase Penetration, but are also used with many of
the Inner Mysteries to produce other interesting effects.

Merinitae can integrate the principles of charms into their laboratory
activities, making use of their knowledge of symbols associated with the
Faerie and Magic realms in their work, and this is represented by three
additional effects of the Faerie Magic Ability:

Faerie Magic may be substituted for Magic Theory when experimenting,
when using faerie vis, or when practicing magic associated with the
Faerie realm.

The amount of vis you can use in a single season is equal to your (Magic
Theory + Faerie Magic) x 2, so long as all of it is faerie vis.

Add your score in Faerie Magic to the number of botch dice you roll when
taking advantage of the two benefits given above, but the effects of
these additional dice tend to be more annoying than dangerous; it takes
two of these botches to produce the negative effects of a normal botch
die. The character still gains a Warping Point for each 0 rolled on
these extra dice, though they do not force you to check for Twilight.
(This is because integrating faerie power into magic warps the character
more quickly, but does not increase her chances of being overcome by
it.) Two or more botches on the standard botch dice require a check for
Twilight as normal, however.

Faerie Magic might also represent the union of Faerie Lore and Magic
Lore, the knowledge of similarities between the two realms. Often this
combination can inspire surprising insights, especially when dealing
with entities traditionally associated with both realms, like pagan
gods, ghosts, and chimerae. It is also an appropriate Ability to use
when trying to distinguish between Magic and Faerie, as it can address
differences between the two realms.

**Specialties:** faerie vis, experimenting, inventing spells, charms,
lore (Arcane)

Charms

Charms are casting aids that identify a specific magical effect using
sympathetic magic, which all magi who study Faerie Magic learn how to
make. They can be physical objects, like sculptures or drawings; or
performances, like songs or stories; or even arcane pronouncements or
ceremonies, like prophecy or naming.

A **temporary charm** takes about ten minutes to design, and must be
used right away, typically with Spontaneous magic. More lasting charms,
or **permanent charms**, take several hours, and must involve a special
object that the maga wields when she activates the charm, incorporating
the object into the effect; if this object is damaged, the charm must be
remade.

A maga who has a score in Faerie Magic and an Arcane Connection to her
target may use a charm as a sympathetic representation, increasing her
Penetration Multiplier by two. This requires a roll when the charm is
made: composing a song might use Communication + Music, while a drawing
might be Dexterity + Craft. The maga produces an effective charm on a
roll of 6+, or 9+ for a permanent charm. Other magi can do this without
Faerie Magic, but it takes them longer and they need a higher total on
the roll (see Sympathetic Connections, earlier).

Temporary charms may only be used once, as they always include unique
properties associated with the effect, though a permanent charm
associated with a special object may be used whenever it is applicable.
A maga may prepare any number of charms in advance, but may only
incorporate one charm into a given spell in this way.

Illusion Mysteries

These Mysteries deal with illusions and images, including aspects of the
physical world that faeries can see but most humans cannot. These
include unusual durations for Faerie Magic spells that can last nearly
forever.

Mystery Cult: The Followers of Pendule

Pendule is regarded as something of a legend within the Order; no one
knows how much of his tale is true and how much is fanciful. According
to the stories, the Provençal wizard was discovered by Flambeau and
refused when given the choice to \"join or die.\" He was powerful enough
to evade the fiery Founder and his followers who sought to destroy him,
and many comedic tales depicting Pendule as a trickster defeating the
mighty and blustery Flambeau with wit and illusions have become part of
Hermetic lore.

Eventually, it seems, Pendule tired of these games and adopted four
Hermetic magi as his followers. No one knows exactly why he did this;
perhaps he simply wanted to share his secrets with others before he
died, or perhaps he desired to learn Magic Theory from them. Two of
these followers were from House Merinita, and having Initiated Faerie
Magic from Quendalon they were able to master the illusion Mysteries
Pendule taught --- the others could not comprehend them. Afterwards,
these Merinitae continued to teach the secrets to their followers as
part of a special House lineage.

Pendule\'s magic was very sensual and personal, and he especially
believed in the use of color and sound in his spells. He expected magic
to transform the wielder, rather than yield submissively to him, and
while he was oddly sensitive to the passage of time, he seemed to have
great difficulty with standard Hermetic durations, preferring spells
that relied upon strange conditions or that triggered after being cast.
He also practiced other Mysteries which his Merinita followers did not
master, and other lineages dedicated to his magic still exist in other
Houses and cults within (and perhaps without) the Order.

Followers of Pendule usually Initiate Spell Timing and Glamour
(described in *Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults*) from their masters.
Imaginem is almost always their primary Art. A common weakness in the
lineage is iron --- both of the Merinitae who studied Pendule\'s secrets
were especially susceptible to it --- and Pendule Merinitae often learn
Spell Improvisation or a Major Magical Focus in counterspells.

Pendule quietly succumbed to death in 854, but not before imparting one
last magical secret to each of his followers. To maintain this
tradition, the Inner Mystery of Perpetuity is usually kept from a maga
until her master is dying, Initiated as a final lesson from teacher to
student.

**Sample Followers of Pendule Initiation: Spell Timing**

**Ease Factor:** 15 (Minor Virtue known to the Mystagogue)

**Script Bonus:** +12

**Script Details:** The Initiate undergoes a ceremony wherein she must
go an entire day and night without sleeping, casting a non-Fatiguing
Imaginem spell every round to count how many individual moments pass
(+3). After this rite she gains three Minor Flaws to represent how her
magic becomes more illusionary, and her way of thinking about time
becomes more rigid: Harmless Magic (+3), Poor Memory (faces) (+3), and a
Social Handicap (+3). Because of this ordeal, the Initiate is said to
begin to more closely resemble Pendule, and many of his followers adopt
wild, multicolored clothing, dye their hair, or radically alter their
physical appearance soon after their Initiation.

Spell Timing (Minor Illusion Mystery)

This Mystery gives a maga access to several new Durations for her
spells. Only those who have Initiated this Mystery may cast or invent
spells and effects that use them.

Three of these new durations allow the maga to cast the spell but keep
it dormant, \"holding\" it for a specified length of time. The effect
and its Penetration are evaluated when it is released, as if she had
just cast the spell. If the parameters are no longer applicable (the
target has moved out of range, for example, or dramatically changed
size), the spell has no effect.

> **Held (Duration):** This duration is the same level as Concentration.
> The maga may cast the spell as normal, but the effect is delayed for
> as long as she concentrates. When she releases it, treat it as if cast
> with Momentary duration.
>
> **Midday/Midnight (Duration):** This duration is equivalent to Sun,
> but does not manifest until dawn, dusk, noon, or midnight. It then
> lasts until the next dawn, dusk, noon, or midnight. For example, a
> spell cast just after dawn would not manifest until noon, and would
> then last until dusk.
>
> **Season (Duration):** This duration is held until the start of the
> next equinox or solstice, and lasts only until the following equinox
> or solstice. It is the same level as Moon, but requires a ritual spell
> like Year.

Three other durations have conditions that must be built into the spell
when it is designed, similar to the Until (Condition) Duration.

> **While (Condition) (Duration):** The target must perform some
> activity, such as a musical performance or reading a book, or fulfill
> some common and temporary physical condition, such as sleeping or
> being drunk. As long as that condition lasts, the spell remains in
> effect. This is the same level as Concentration.
>
> **Not (Condition) (Duration):** The spell lasts for as long as the
> target does *not* fulfill some common physical condition, such as
> sleeping or speaking. It is equivalent in level to Sun duration, but
> cannot last longer than a month.
>
> **If (Condition) (Duration):** This effect triggers if the target
> fulfills a specific condition. It has an additional Duration which
> determines how long the triggered spell lasts after it takes effect.
> To determine the level, you should add four magnitudes to the level
> calculated based on the Duration that the spell has when it takes
> effect, and it must be cast as a ritual spell. The spell expires
> without triggering if the caster passes into Twilight, even
> temporarily, if the caster dies, or if a year passes.

In addition, this Mystery allows the Merinita\'s spells to have
**recurring** effects---she designs the spell so that from then on it
always triggers in response to an environmental or physical condition,
increasing its level as described on the chart in the insert. The
recurring spell must be cast as a ritual, and effects that require a
ritual because of their unusual effects or non-Hermetic origins (not
because of their level or spell parameters) cannot recur. For example, a
ritual with Year duration can be made to recur, but a lasting effect
like *Chirurgeon\'s Healing Touch* (CrCo20) or a unique effect like
*Breath of the Open Sky* (ReAu40) cannot.

Recurring spells may be given triggers, using the special (Condition)
durations above. The cost for making them recur is based on how often
they can be activated; if a daily-recurring effect is activated twice in
one day, the second trigger will have no effect. Also, spells cannot
stack; when a spell recurs, it cancels before starting again. This is
not a noticeable interruption; as with an enchanted device, the
transition usually appears constant.

Recurring Spells

Use the frequency that most closely matches how often the spell recurs,
rounding up to the next greater magnitude. For example, a spell that
recurs every ten minutes adds five magnitudes. Spells cannot recur more
often than once per minute.

> **Frequency** **Magnitudes**
>
> minute +5
>
> day +4
>
> month +3
>
> year +2
>
> decade +1

Verditius --- Verditius Magic

Verditius magi are initiated into the Outer Mystery of Verditius Magic,
which allows them to incorporate craft abilities into their magic. To do
this, the magus crafts the item from raw materials as part of the first
season of enchanting it. For a talisman or standard invested device,
this is the season in which it is opened for enchantment. For lesser
enchanted items and charged items, this is the whole process. If
crafting the item would normally take the magus a season or less, this
does not increase the time required for the enchantment. If crafting the
item would normally take more than a season, the process takes a whole
number of seasons that is at least as long as the time it would normally
take the magus to craft the item. For example, if it would normally take
the magus four months to craft the item, then it takes him two seasons
to craft and enchant it. No matter how long this takes, it only includes
the first season of enchantment.

As part of this process, the magus may add details that enhance the
Shape and Material bonus of the item. These details give an additional
bonus to all the item\'s existing Shape and Material bonuses equal to
the creating magus\'s Philosophiae score, for the purposes of
enchantment. These bonuses apply in the season that the details are
added, as well as in the future. Other uses of Shape and Material
bonuses, such as the casting bonuses from a talisman, use the standard
bonus. Other magi refer to these details as Verditius Runes, but they
are far more complex than that suggests, and do not normally look like
actual runes. Other magi get this bonus if they instill appropriate
powers into an item created by a Verditius. The total bonus from Shape
and Material and Verditius Runes is still limited by the magus\'s Magic
Theory score.

The magus uses the magic of the enchantment to shape the item. This does
not require any Craft Ability, although most Verditius magi will use an
Ability that they have, and the final form may be impossible to make by
mundane means. For example, a Verditius magus could set a gem in a
wooden lattice so that the gem cannot be removed without breaking the
wood, without having any breaks in the wood to get it in. The final form
must be able to sustain itself by mundane means once created; in
particular, it must be strong enough to bear its own weight. If the
magus is not using Craft Ability and an Ability score is needed, use the
magus\'s Finesse in place of Craft.

However, most Verditius do use mundane craft as part of this process.
This is because a magus who does so may add his score in the relevant
Craft Ability to all Lab Totals for enchanting that item, both in the
first season and in the future. Thanks to his mystical link to the item,
this bonus is always his current Craft Ability, even if it has improved
since he crafted the item. Note that only one Craft Ability can be added
to the Lab Total in a given season, even if the magus has more than one
applicable to the item. The applicable Ability may, however, change over
time --- the magus should add his highest applicable Craft Ability.
Other magi adding enchantments to an invested device do not get this
bonus, even if they have the same Craft Ability as the creating magus,
and even if they are members of House Verditius.

If the magus creates the enchanted item in this way, the number of pawns
of vis needed to open the item for enchantment is reduced by the
magus\'s Craft score, to a minimum of one pawn. The magus, or any other
magus, may invest effects in the device as if he had paid the full,
normal cost to open it.

A Verditius naturally reinforces Verditius Runes as part of the
enchantment process, even when working on an item that has already been
enchanted, and so if a Verditius working on an enchanted item has a
higher Philosophiae score than the earlier Verditius enchanters, the
Verditius Rune bonus increases. This also applies if a Verditius magus
increases his Philosophiae score between seasons of enchantment.

Verditius magi need casting tools to cast Formulaic or Ritual spells.
They make these themselves, in a form that appeals to them, and it only
takes an hour or so to make a new one. However, if they lose or cannot
reach their tools, they cannot cast their Formulaic spells. Spontaneous
spells do not require casting tools, although Flaws hampering
Spontaneous magic are very common among the Verditius.

Hubris

A magus\'s first Initiation into an Inner Mystery of House Verditius is
always accompanied by an Ordeal that gives him the minor Flaw: Hubris.
Every Verditius magus who seeks knowledge of the Inner Mysteries is
plagued by this psychological shortcoming, the growth of exaggerated
self-esteem. The magus realizes the worldly benefits he can reap from
his magical creations, and his prideful image of himself blossoms. At
first this is just a slight personality shift, but as the Verditius
magus profits from his magical craft, his hubris grows. This trait,
which beleaguered the founder, is inherent in the magic of the Inner
Mysteries. In game terms, characters receive the Minor Personality Flaw:
Hubris and the corresponding Personality Trait: Hubris 1.

Hubris is more than merely a Personality Trait. While it contains all
the game aspects of a Personality Trait, it is also a measure of the
degree that a character has succumbed to the curse of pride that plagued
the founder. A propensity for pride is part and parcel of the Mysteries
of House Verditius. The intrinsic magical link between Verditius\'
hubris and his arcane crafting caries through to his descendants. A
Verditius magus\'s pride is mystically coupled with his Gift, and as his
Hubris increases so does his ability to instill greater amounts of magic
in items that are similarly connected to him. A Verditius magus can add
his Hubris score to his Lab Totals for creating a talisman, enchanting
casting tools (Minor House Inner Mystery), binding magical animals,
making automata, and creating attuned items (Major House Inner
Mysteries).

For role-playing purposes, the specific flavor of a magus\' Hubris
should be noted in parentheses after the Personality score. Hubris does
not manifest in all magi exactly the same way. Some are overly proud,
some arrogant, some pompous. Characters that already have the Minor
Personality Flaw: Proud have their Hubris score automatically increased
by +1, and those with the Major version of the Flaw increase their
Hubris by +3.

Hubris increases over time, building like an Ability. Hubris cannot be
deliberately changed by the player, unlike other Personality Traits.
Specific situations grant Experience Points that are applied to a
character\'s Hubris score. If a Verditius magus receives recognition,
fame, money or vis for his magical efforts, his Hubris score increases.
While a degree of pride is inevitable for every Verditius magus, a
completely conceited nature is avoidable. Those wishing to keep their
Hubris score low need merely avoid many of the behaviors that result in
increasing that score.

**Experience Points Behavior**

1 Selling a charged item or an item of quality. Manufacturing a similar
item for another person and receiving pay for your efforts (either money
or vis).

1 Repairing or reforging an item for another for pay.

1 Selling or manufacturing for another a lesser enchanted device.

3 Selling or manufacturing for another a greater enchanted device.

6 Selling or manufacturing for another an attuned item.

1/magnitude of Might Selling an automaton.

1 Winning the apprentice category of the Contest (see *Houses of Hermes:
Mystery Cults,* page 116).

3 Winning the journeymen category of the Contest.

6 Winning the master category of the Contest.

1 Learning a new minor House Inner Mystery.

3 Learning a new major House Inner Mystery.

1 Declaring a vendetta.

3 Winning a vendetta.

The higher a magus\'s Hubris score grows, the harder it is for him to
resist situations that will further increase it. A magus with Hubris 4
will be quite tempted to continue to sell magical items, for example. If
a character wishes to resist such temptations, in hopes of maintaining a
low Hubris score, you can make opposed Personality Trait rolls. This
assumes the character has a Personality Trait that she can uses against
her Hubris score. She can also spend a Confidence Point to walk away
from the situation.

Magi with Hubris scores of 6 and higher are extremely self-centered.
These are the magi most prone to engage in vendettas with other
Verditius magi, usually with those as self-centered as themselves.
Resisting a declared vendetta is difficult. If the maga wishes to
resist, you must make an opposed Personality Trait + stress die roll
against an Ease Factor of your maga\'s Hubris score + her challenger\'s
Hubris score. You may substitute her Intelligence if she does not have a
Personality Trait that works opposite Hubris.

Demons and other Infernal agents are quite aware that Verditius magi are
susceptible to the great sin of pride, and many lick their chops in
anticipation as a maga advances through the Inner Mysteries. Some will
offer seemingly innocuous assistance to young magi to propel them on
their hubristic path: anonymous gifts of vis, coincidental deliveries of
Verditius Cult Lore texts to copy, and accidental meetings with wealthy
clients willing to pay large amounts for minor magical gewgaws.

Enchant Casting Tools -- Minor House Mystery Virtue

Soon after Fenistour invented casting tools, allowing Verditius magi to
cast Formulaic spells, her filii sought to develop a method of
enchanting them, hoping to further compensate their brethren for their
clumsiness at spell casting. Achieving their goal in the ninth century,
Verditius magi began sharing these secrets, developing Scripts so that
their fellows could be more easily Initiated into this Mystery. This is
particularly useful for those adventurous Verditius magi who like
casting spells outside of their laboratory. This is a very common Inner
House Mystery among Verditius magi in the thirteenth century.

The magus may enchant his casting tools to mirror certain effects of
mastered spells, as well as allowing casting bonuses when he uses them.
This is a laboratory process, requiring a season spent working in a
Hermetic laboratory. Each casting tool can only be enchanted once, even
if it has more than one property, and the magus must be able to finish
the enchantment in a single season as if he were creating a lesser
enchanted device. Enchanted casting tools cannot be instilled with other
magical powers, and cannot be used as a base for a lesser or greater
enchanted item.

To enchant a casting tool compare the magus\'s Technique and Form Lab
Total to the level of the spell that the casting tool is associated
with. A casting tool is closely linked to the spell through the
Verditius Mysteries, and so the magus may carve Verditius runes into the
casting tool, adding his Philosophiae score to the Lab Total, even if
the tool would not normally have a Shape or Material bonus for that
spell. If the magus has a Craft Ability that could include making the
tools, you may also add his Craft score. Because enchanted casting tools
become permanent Arcane Connections to the magus, add his Hubris
Personality score to the Lab Total. The magus also receives a bonus for
knowing the spell in the first place, adding the magnitude of the spell
to the Lab Total, much like the bonus received from knowing a similar
spell (ArM5, page 101). The Lab Total must double the level of the spell
plus any additional powers the magus wishes to instill.

**Enchant Casting Tools Lab Total: Technique + Form + Intelligence +
Magic Theory + Aura Modifier + Philosophiae + Hubris + Magnitude of
Known Spell + Craft (if applicable)**

The base effect level of the casting tool equals the level of the spell
it is used for. The effect level increases based upon the additional
effects the magus wishes to enchant it with. There is no limit to the
number of effects he can add, as long as his Lab Total plus bonuses is
double the final effect level.

**Effect level Increase Casting Tool Effect**

+2 Fast Casting (as a mastered spell).

+2 Multiple Casting (as a mastered spell) --- this allows one additional
spell, additional spells may be added for a +2 effect level increase
each.

+2 Quiet Casting (as a mastered spell) --- this can be taken twice to
cast the spell silently.

\+ x Increase spell casting roll by x.

+10 Summon casting tool --- the casting tool appears in the magus\'s
hand no matter where he stores it, although this is usually in his
sanctum.

+10 Dismiss casting tool --- the casting tool disappears from the
magus\'s person, traveling back to a place chosen at the time of
enchantment. An Arcane Connection to this place must be bound into the
item, and so it is almost always the magus\'s sanctum.

Enchanting casting tools requires vis. The magus must spend one pawn of
Technique or Form specific vis per 10 levels of the final effect level
total, rounded up.

**Initiation of Enchant Casting Tools**

**Ease Factor**: 15 (Minor Virtue known to the Mystagogue)

**Script Bonus**: +9

**Script Details**: The Mystagogue spends a season with the Initiate,
creating casting tools one after another (+3). The Initiate must know
the exact time and date that she was Initiated into the House\'s Outer
Mystery. On an anniversary of that date, she ritualistically buries all
her casting tools in a Magic regio (+3). If the Initiation is
successful, the Initiate learns the Inner House Minor Mystery: Enchant
Casting Tools. The buried casting tools are destroyed and the Initiate
receives the Minor Flaw Hubris if this her first Initiation into an
Inner Mystery, or Limited Magic Resistance with Vim if it is not (Ordeal
+3).

Ex Miscellanea Traditions

House Ex Miscellanea is not at all unified, consisting of many different
magical traditions. A large number are described in *Houses of Hermes:
Societates*, including the Columbae, who brought the techniques of
warding into Hermetic magic, and the Cult of Orpheus, which may be the
heir to an ancient Greek mystery cult. This section provides details of
three relatively simple traditions that you may choose for your maga, or
you may create your own following the guidelines in the Characters
chapter.

Beast Masters

This tradition commands magic which Hermetic Theory finds very hard: the
summoning and control of wild creatures. Every apprentice of this
tradition was abandoned by his master in areas of wilderness at a very
young age, where he had to fend for himself. During this time he
developed a particular affinity for a specific group of animals, which
forever shapes his magic. Due to this unusual training, all Beast
Masters also have the Virtues of Animal Ken and a Minor Magical Focus
with a specific group of animals. They are never taught how to turn into
animal form, or how to harm animals, which results in the Incompatible
Arts Flaw (MuCo & PeAn). They must take at least one more Flaw to
balance their Virtues, and then have only 8 points of Flaws available to
them to buy another 8 points of Virtues.

**Major Non-Hermetic Virtue**: Summon Animals

**Minor Hermetic Virtue**: Inoffensive to Animals

**Major Hermetic Flaw**: Study Requirement

**Required Virtues and Flaws**: Animal Ken, Minor Magical Focus;
Incompatible Arts.

Summon Animals

This Ability allows the character to summon mundane animals from
potentially long distances away. To use this Ability, the character must
be capable of making an audible call to the creatures he wishes to
summon, and must be within one day\'s journey of a habitat where the
required species are found. The number of animals which respond to his
summons is determined by the score in the character's Ability; see the
table below. He must then make a Communication + Summon Animals roll
against an Ease Factor of 9. If successful, the animals arrive within 1
hour of the character making the call, although exceeding the Ease
Factor by 3 makes them come in 2 minutes, and exceeding it by 6 summons
them in a single round.

The character cannot directly communicate with the animals unless he has
another Ability which allows him to do so (such as Animal Ken), and they
depart naturally as determined by the storyguide. Even if the character
lacks the ability to communicate with the animals, they act as if
friendly towards him, and if naturally aggressive, may fight to defend
him.

Ability Score Number of animals arriving

1 1 animal of Size --2, or equivalent mass (2 of Size --3, 5 of Size
--4, 10 of Size --5, 20 of Size --6, etc.)

2 2 animals of Size --2, or equivalent mass (1 of Size --1, 5 of Size
--3, 10 of Size --4, 20 of Size --5, etc.)

3 5 animals of Size --2, or equivalent mass (1 of Size 0, 2 of Size --1,
10 of Size --3, 20 of Size --4, etc.)

4 10 animals of Size --2, or equivalent mass (1 of Size +1, 2 of Size 0,
5 of Size --1, 20 of Size --3, etc.)

5 20 animals of Size --2, or equivalent mass (1 of Size +2, 2 of Size
+1, 5 of Size 0, 10 of Size --1, etc.)

**Specialities**: a particular type of animal (Supernatural)

Story seed: Animal Experimentation

This Ability can call animals quicker than they could possibly travel
under their own speed, and therefore breaks the Limit of Arcane
Connection. A magus interested in pursuing breakthroughs in Magic Theory
might seek out a character with this Ability.

The Nemthengacha

The Nemthengacha (singular: Nemthenga) are a sect of Ex Miscellanea magi
who have the ability to create animosity and dissent in their listeners.
Their origins are clouded. Some claim the Irish poet/demigod Bricriu mac
Carbada is the progenitor of the line, while others say that the Welsh
hero Efnisien is the first of the breed. Asserting an even more
grandiose foundation, some Ex Miscellanea say that their tradition
descends from Loki, the multi-faceted and often malevolent Norse god. It
is true that this tradition is only found in Celtic and Scandinavian
sorcerers.

Nemthengacha, also known as \"poison-tongues\", \"bitter-tongues\", or
\"deceivers\", were more frequent before the advent of Christianity. In
pre-Christian society, Nemthengacha held a devastating reputation. In a
society where loyalty and family bonds are everything, a Nemthenga\'s
ability to turn one man against his allies was devastating. People
avoided Nemthengacha, but since many lived among the tribe, they could
not be entirely ignored and were placated as best as the tribe could
manage. While no more anticlerical than any other Ex Miscellanea
tradition, they suffered severely from interactions with Christian
missionaries. Perhaps it was due to their overt presence. The unGifted
Nemthengacha did not need to hide from their tribesmen, and several held
prominent social positions as shamans, wise men, and king\'s champions.
Their tradition ebbed, and practitioners retreated to remote parts of
their lands.

In the thirteenth century, Gifted Nemthengacha have been systematically
accepted into the Order of Hermes, although some unGifted Nemthengacha
still remain, living in the far hinterlands of Mythic Europe. Though
stretched, they never severed their connections to their clans, so that
many are still related to members of a local tribe or kin group. Nor
have they abandoned their connection to royal society, with many
Nemthengacha still serving their local king.

Powers

Like every Ex Miscellanea character, a magus of the Nemthengacha
tradition receives a free Major non-Hermetic Virtue, a compulsory Major
Flaw, and a free Minor Hermetic Virtue. The Major Non-Hermetic Virtue is
Embitterment, a new Major Supernatural Ability. Embitterment is similar
to Entrancement (page @@), but the effects are more specific and potent.
Due to this focus, Nemthengacha find it difficult to control other
emotions in a target\'s mind, which spills over into other aspects of
Hermetic magic. Each has the Major Hermetic Flaw: Deficient Technique
Rego. Since Embitterment depends solely on the Nemthenga\'s voice, his
magic is less dependent on gestures than other Hermetic magi. He
receives the Minor Hermetic Virtue: Subtle Magic at no cost.

**Major Non-Hermetic Virtue:** Embitterment

**Minor Hermetic Virtue:** Subtle Magic

**Major Hermetic Flaw:** Deficient Technique (Rego)

Embitterment

Embitterment is a Major Supernatural Ability that allows the speaker to
make a listener hostile to a target of the speaker\'s choice. This
hostility can range from simple antagonism to murder. Through simple
conversation, the speaker makes the listener dislike, resent, or hate a
person formerly considered a friend. The conversation does not have to
be long; a round is time enough for this effect to take place.

To embitter a target, the player states the exact specifications of how
the target will act against the intended victim. He then rolls the
character\'s Communication + Embitterment + a stress die and compares it
to a variable Ease Factor, which depends on the level of aggression he
wishes to instill, and the level of loyalty possessed between the target
and the former ally. Since this is a Supernatural Ability, the roll
always uses a stress die. The Embitterment power of the Nemthengacha is
a Magic power for purposes of determining its interaction with the other
realms of power; it seems likely that an Infernal version also exists.

**Embitterment Roll: Communication + Embitterment + stress die**

Consult the following chart to determine the Ease Factor.

Ease Factor Desired Effect

6 Turn a man against his neighbor, business partner, or co-worker

9 Turn a man against his wife, friend, or cousin (distant kin)

12 Turn a man against his kin (father, brother, and nuclear family)

15 Turn a man against his lord

18 Turn a man against his king

The base effect makes the victim dislike the target, leading to slander,
resentment, and a refusal to cooperate with him. Increasing this
animosity to hatred adds +3 to the Ease Factor. Victims made to hate the
indicated target desire to do some kind of harm to him, but stop short
of killing the person. Such a person would destroy someone\'s fields,
ruin a business opportunity, wreck their marriage, or perhaps wound them
in a duel. Increasing hatred to loathing adds another +3 to the Ease
Factor (+6 in total), and makes the victim try to slay the intended
target. For example, the Ease Factor is 18 to embitter a man to commit
patricide (base 12 + 6), and 24 to commit regicide (base 18 + 6).

The Range of embitterment is Voice and the Target is always Individual.
The Duration is Sun, although this can be increased to Moon by
increasing Ease Factor by +3. Because embitterment acts through
conversation, the caster must speak a language that the target
comprehends.

A character so embittered cannot disobey the command. He is not allowed
a Loyalty roll to see if he can ignore the emotional summons, or other
quibbling based on the character\'s Personality Traits. Hermetic magic
can cancel the embitterment with a Perdo Vim spell. Rego Mentem magic
can replace the feelings of animosity with feelings of loyalty or
compassion, Creo Mentem can create feelings of loyalty that supersede
the effect, and Perdo Mentem could erase the feelings of animosity. To
determine how powerful a Hermetic spell needs to be, consider the
effective level of the embitterment to be equal to the Nemthenga\'s
score in Embitterment times five.

Tempestaria (Weather Witch)

This tradition figures prominently in lands occupied by the Saxons,
including their homeland in northern Germany as well as in England and
Denmark. Weather magic is well-integrated into Hermetic Magic, and the
art of Auram is populated with highly useful spells. The hedge witches
known as Tempestariae are experts in these very magics. There are
weather-witches who can summon rain which can last for days, or who
cause no rain to fall at all for an entire season. The fogs summoned by
a tempestaria from the sea have bound ships into the harbors all along
an entire coastline. The most common type of tempestaria, however, is
one who can bind the wind to her service. They require simple improvised
tools which have sympathetic relationships to their spells -- feathers
for snow magic, drums for thunder magic, scattered sand for rain magic,
and so forth.

**Major Non-Hermetic Virtue**: Whistle Up The Wind (or similar Ability)

**Minor Hermetic Virtue**: Affinity with Auram

**Major Hermetic Flaw**: Necessary Condition (tools for their magic to
work)

Whistle Up The Wind

A character with this Ability is able to create a wind, duplicating the
effects of any wind-based Creo Auram spell at Range Voice, Target
Individual; similar Supernatural Abilities exist for other weather
phenomena. To invoke the wind, the character literally has to whistle,
and makes a Stamina + Whistle Up The Wind roll, against the Ease Factor
listed in the table below. If successful, the wind immediately starts to
blow as commanded by the character. It will continue to blow in the same
manner even if the character stops whistling. A character who summons a
wind at a particular strength can change that wind to another type with
a similar strength (such as from *Circular Winds of Protection* to
*Broom of the Winds*), diminish it to a weaker effect (such as *Chamber
of Spring Breezes*), or end it entirely. Each of these changes requires
a Communication + Music roll, using the Ease Factors for Maintaining
Concentration on a spell (page @@). Whistling a new tune in this manner
cannot increase the strength of a wind, or return a diminished wind to
its former intensity; instead the character must make a new Whistle Up
The Wind roll. All effects of this Ability diminish to the next lowest
level of strength once every 24 hours, when the sun sets, until they
dwindle to nothing.

Ease Factor Strength of Wind

6 Light breeze, strong enough to clear a stench from a room

9 Moderate wind, strong enough to affect the accuracy of arrows

12 Strong wind, powerful enough to propel a sailing ship

15 Gale force wind, strong enough to knock someone over

18 Hurricane force wind, strong enough to uproot trees

**Specialities**: at sea, in mountains, during the winter (Supernatural)
