Laboratory

A magus spends much more time in his laboratory engaged in study and
other activities than adventuring in the lands outside the covenant.
There are Arts to study, books to write, spells to invent, and items to
enchant. Time between stories is recorded in seasons, each of which is
enough time to accomplish a single long-term laboratory activity. Each
of those activities is described in this chapter.

The Laboratory in Play

Laboratory activities take up most of your life as a magus, so you
should take some care in deciding both your individual laboratory
activities and your attitude towards your laboratory and your creations.
Your laboratory itself is an important reflection of your personality,
as it is where you spend much of your time. Take the time to think about
what your sanctum looks like and what\'s in it. Does it bear protective
spells? Where do you sleep? What do you have in your lab, and where do
you keep it? Do you hide your most prized possessions? Is your
laboratory clean and well kept, or a disorganized mess where no one but
you can find anything? Answering such questions helps you define your
magus, and is usually fun to boot. The rules for Laboratory
personalization on page @@ explain the ways in which such descriptions
can have an impact on the mechanics of laboratory activities.

Basic Laboratory Activities

You use one sum, called the Lab Total, frequently in calculating your
ability to accomplish various laboratory tasks. This total varies from
task to task because it uses the Technique and Form appropriate to the
task at hand. For instance, your Lab Total when learning a Rego Terram
spell includes your Rego and Terram scores. Spell requisites might also
apply, as can other modifications, depending on the specific activity.

Your basic Lab Total is:

**Technique + Form + Intelligence + Magic Theory + Aura Modifier**

The Lab Total for a particular Technique and Form is called the
Technique Form Lab Total: for example, the Creo Vim Lab Total is Creo +
Vim + Intelligence + Magic Theory + Aura Modifier. If an activity is
based on a Lab Total, the magus needs a laboratory to do it, and there
are also a few activities that do need a laboratory, but are not based
on a Lab Total.

Creating a Laboratory

A laboratory is normally created in a space with at least 500 square
feet of floor area, and a ceiling at least ten feet high, and it is
normally well protected from the elements; normal canvas is not
sufficient, but a wooden wall is. (Laboratories that do not reach these
standards cause problems for work in them; see page @@.) A character
must have a Magic Theory score of at least 3 to set up a laboratory, and
overall it takes two seasons of work.

The first season creates a basic laboratory, which makes laboratory
activities possible but imposes a --3 penalty to all Lab Totals. The
second season completes the process, making a standard laboratory and
removing the penalty. A maga can go on to personalize her laboratory,
and the process of doing so is described at the end of this chapter.

Arcane Studies

Knowledge of Magic Theory and the magical Arts is important to magi ---
so much so that many spend their entire lives in study. Magi may
increase their Art scores in several different ways. Each is described
in turn in the \"Experience and Advancement\" section, which begins on
page @@.

Fixing Arcane Connections

A magus who has an active Arcane Connection (see page @@) may make it
permanent by spending a season of laboratory work and one pawn of Vim
vis. The connection must be active at the beginning of the season, but
need not be such as to naturally last for the whole season. This
activity must be performed in a laboratory, even though it is not based
on a Lab Total.

Vis

Vis Extraction

You can extract raw vis from a magical environment (that is, any area
with a Magical aura) by focusing the magical energy into a physical
form. For each season that you spend extracting vis from the
environment, calculate your Creo Vim Lab Total. For every ten points or
part thereof in the result, one pawn of Vim vis is produced.

**Vis Extraction: One tenth (round up) of Creo Vim Lab Total pawns of
Vim vis**

Vis Transfer

A magus can easily move raw vis from one physical form to another in his
laboratory. This takes a day (from sunrise to sunrise), and can be done
while the magus is engaged in another laboratory activity. It must,
however, be done in a laboratory.

The maximum amount of vis that an item can contain is determined from
the Material and Size Table on page @@. When moving raw vis into an
item, rather than preparing it for enchantment, a magus may move any
number of pawns up to the capacity of the item.

An item that has been opened for enchantment (see page @@, below) cannot
contain raw vis as well.

Note that this changes the physical thing that the vis is in, *not* the
Hermetic Art to which the vis is attuned.

Vis Use

The amount of raw vis that a magus may use in a single season is limited
to twice his Magic Theory score. The magus cannot successfully integrate
any more vis into a single project. In many sagas, vis will be rare
enough that this limit will not come into play.

**Vis Limit: Magic Theory x 2 pawns per season**

Spells

Formulaic spells are a major measure of your power because they
determine those things you can do easily and predictably. As a magus,
you may invent new spells in several ways.

Learning Spells from a Teacher

You may learn spells from another magus who is willing to spend a season
teaching you. These spells may be of different Techniques and Forms, so
a magus could teach you a Creo Ignem spell and a Perdo Terram spell in
the same season.

The number of levels of spells you may learn in one season is equal to
the teacher\'s highest applicable Lab Total. If the teaching magus had a
Creo Ignem Lab Total of 50 and a Perdo Terram Lab Total of 35, he could
teach you a total of 50 levels of spells. The number of levels of spells
of a given Technique and Form combination that you may learn in a given
season is equal to the teacher\'s Lab Total in that combination.

The highest individual spell level you may learn is equal to your Lab
Total in the Technique and Form of the spell. Thus, if you had a Creo
Ignem Lab Total of 30 and a Perdo Terram Lab Total of 25, and were
learning from the teacher described above, you could learn a CrIg 25
spell and a PeTe 25 spell, or CrIg 20, CrIg 10, PeTe 15 and PeTe 5, or
any other combination adding up to fifty total levels (the teacher\'s
Lab Total in Creo Ignem), as long as there were no more than 35 levels
of Perdo Terram spells (the teacher\'s Lab Total in Perdo Terram), with
no Creo Ignem spell over level 30 and no Perdo Terram spell over level
25 (your Lab Totals in the relevant Technique and Form combinations).

Even when you learn a spell from a teacher, it is your Wizard\'s Sigil
that manifests in your version; you actually invent the spell yourself,
but with constant guidance from the teacher.

**Maximum Total Levels: Teacher\'s highest applicable Lab Total**

**Maximum Levels in one Technique and Form:** **Teacher\'s Lab Total in
that Technique and Form**

**Highest Level of an Individual Spell: Student\'s Lab Total in the
Technique and Form of the Spell**

Inventing Spells

Inventing a spell by yourself is more difficult than learning one, but
of course you don\'t need a teacher to do it. First, decide the effects
of the spell you wish to invent; you may pick a spell described in the
Spells chapter to invent, invent a variant of a spell listed there, or
make up something completely on your own.

If you want to duplicate an existing spell, use the statistics given for
it in the Spells chapter, but include your wizard\'s sigil (see
\"Sigils\" on page @@).

If you create a variant of a spell in the Spells chapter (change its
Range, say, or allow it to affect a different kind of Target), first
refer to the spell that you are basing your spell on. Then determine
whether you are changing the spell\'s Range, Duration, Target, or a
combination of those. The new spell\'s level is determined based on how
radically the new spell is different from the old one. The method for
determining the new spell\'s level is described under \"Changing Ranges,
Durations, and Targets\" on page @@.

When you invent a completely new spell you must describe it fully, both
in terms of its mechanics (Range, Duration, and Target) and how it fits
into the medieval paradigm. You must make sure that it takes into
account the limits of magic (see page @@). To determine the new spell\'s
level, you must first determine its Technique and Form. This should be a
matter of common sense. Next, refer to the general guidelines for that
Technique/Form combination, found in the Spells chapter. This will
provide a list of what sorts of effects correspond to each spell level.
Determine the final level of the spell by referring to the guidelines
\"Changing Ranges, Durations, and Targets\" on page @@.

Once you have determined the specifics of the spell you are trying to
invent, you must determine if you can actually invent it. Then, you must
figure out how long it will take. You can only invent a spell if your
Lab Total exceeds the spell\'s level. You get a bonus for knowing a
similar spell (+1 per five levels of the highest level similar spell ---
see \"Similar Spells\" on page @@). Any requisites that the new spell
has also count in calculating your Lab Total. For each point that your
Lab Total exceeds the spell\'s level, you accumulate one point per
season. When you accumulate points equal to the level of the spell, you
invent it.

It is also possible to invent a spell based on another magus\'s
Laboratory Text (see page @@). This is much faster, and most spells that
magi know are invented in this way.

Example: Inventing Spells

Tillitus of House Bonisagus wants to invent some warding spells, as
minor mystical creatures seem to give him a lot of trouble. General
wards of this sort are Rego Vim (see page @@), and can be invented at
any level. Semita Errabunda, Tillitus\'s covenant, has a Magic aura of
5, and Tillitus himself has Intelligence +5, Magic Theory 3, +2 for
Puissant Magic Theory, his free Bonisagus Virtue, Rego 5, and Vim 5.
Thus, his Rego Vim Lab Total is 25.

Consulting the Spells chapter, Matt, Tillitus\'s player, sees that a
separate spell must be invented for each of the four Realms. He decides
to start by inventing a good ward against magical creatures. He picks
level 20, as this is less than his Lab Total.

Tillitus\'s Lab Total of 25 exceeds the spell level, 20, by 5, so every
season Tillitus gains 5 points towards the spell. Since the spell is
level 20, that means it will take him four seasons, a whole year, to
invent the spell. Matt isn\'t sure that he wants to spend that much time
on it, so he looks at a lower level spell.

If Tillitus tries to invent a level 12 spell, he gets 13 points towards
it every season, and thus can invent it in a single season. If he tries
to invent a level 13 spell, he gets 12 points per season, so it would
take him two seasons. Matt thus decides that Tillitus will invent a
level 12 ward against magical creatures.

Magical Enchantments

Physical creations, as surely as magical knowledge, can increase your
power as a magus. In addition to talismans, which you can use to
concentrate your magical powers, you can create invested devices, which
mimic the powers of spells; lesser enchanted devices, simpler versions
of invested devices; charged items, which can be used a limited number
of times; and longevity rituals, which extend your mortal life. Since
magical enchantments are unique creations that follow the logic of
individual magi, determining how to use one that someone else has
created can be a lengthy and even dangerous process.

Magical enchantments are created through a type of ritual magic, and
therefore require a great deal of time, effort, and magical resources.
You must take the time to prepare your laboratory for the task, gather
all the necessary materials and equipment, and then craft your work in
earnest, exercising great care with the details of the enchantment. In
the end, you have an item that is independent and that generates its own
magical energies in order to function, but that is uniquely tied to your
magical abilities. Your magical sigil figures just as prominently in the
effects produced by your magical enchantments as it does in the effects
produced by your spells.

Raw vis is often required to create magical enchantments. The process of
enchanting an item transforms the vis, linking the magic power
inexorably to the item in which it is instilled. Vis used for
enchantments is thus transformed so that it is no longer usable for any
other purposes, and it can never be extracted from the enchantment it is
used to create. Magi sometimes refer to the magic of enchantments as
\"spun,\" rather than \"raw,\" vis.

Effects matching those of Ritual spells may not be placed in any
enchantment. The elaborate rituals needed to control that much magical
power simply cannot be contained in an unthinking physical item. The
exception is that spells that are Rituals only because the spell level
is over 50, not because of Duration, Target, or major effect, may be
placed in items.

Enchantment Summary

1\. Choose type of item.

Invested Items: Must be opened to enchantment, expensive. Can contain
many effects, which can be powerful.

Lesser Enchantments: Need not be opened, cheap. Can only contain one
effect, and the creator must be able to make it in a single season.

Charged Items: No vis cost, can always be created in a single season.
Run out.

2\. Open item for enchantment (Invested Items only). Uses a number of
pawns of Vim vis equal to the product of the material base and the size
multiplier, from the Size and Material table. A magus cannot use more
than 2 x Magic Theory pawns of vis in a single season.

3\. Invest effect.

Invested Items and Lesser Enchantments: For every point by which your
Lab Total exceeds the level of the effect, you gain one point towards
the effect per season. Once your points equal the level of the effect,
it is invested. You must invest a Lesser Enchantment in one season. Uses
a number of pawns of vis matching the Technique or Form of the effect
equal to the level divided by ten (rounded up). Again, a magus cannot
use more than 2 x Magic Theory pawns of vis in a single season.

Charged items: For every five points or fraction by which your Lab Total
exceeds the level of the effect, you get one charge.

4\. Invest further effects (Invested Items only): You can use a number
of pawns of vis equal to the number of pawns spent opening the item to
invest effects. Once the number of pawns used to invest effects equals
the number of pawns used to open the item, the item is full, and no
further effects can be added.

Types of Enchanted Item

Enchanted devices come in three types: invested items, lesser
enchantments, and charged items.

Invested Items

Invested items must be prepared for enchantment before any powers are
instilled, but multiple effects can be instilled in one item. A magus
may spend several seasons instilling one effect, and need not instill
all desired effects in the item at once.

The total number of pawns of vis expended when instilling effects may
not exceed the number of pawns of vis spent to prepare the item for
enchantment. Once the two numbers match, the invested device is
\'full\'. It is not possible to remove an effect from a device to make
room for a better one.

Lesser Enchantments

Lesser enchantments do not need to be prepared before a power is
instilled, but only one power may be instilled. In addition, the
creating magus must be able to instill the power in a single season; his
Lab Total must be at least twice the adjusted level of the effect.

Investing an effect in a lesser enchantment costs one pawn of
appropriate vis for every ten levels or fraction of the effect, just as
for an invested item, but there is no need to spend any Vim vis to
prepare the item. The total amount of vis needed is just the one pawn
per ten levels or part required to instill the effect. The amount of vis
that a magus can expend on a lesser enchantment is limited by the
material and size of the object being enchanted (see page @@), just as
for an invested device.

A lesser enchantment can never receive any further magical powers; once
the magus has spent a single season on it, the work is complete.

Charged Items

Charged items do not cost vis, but can only be used a limited number of
times. It takes a single season to create charged items.

Design the level of effect for the charged item using the normal rules
for enchanted items, with the exception that you do not have to pick a
number of uses per day. A charged item can be used as desired until the
charges run out.

Once you have chosen the effect, you spend a season and compare your Lab
Total to the level of the effect. For every 5 points, or fraction
thereof, by which you exceed the level, you get one charge, but if your
Lab Total is exactly equal to the level, you get one charge rather than
none. If your Lab Total exceeds the level by 1 to 5 points, you still
only get one charge. If your Lab Total is less than the level of the
effect you cannot create charged items of this kind.

You may split the charges produced between as many physical objects as
you wish, although each object must be identical. The objects could be
arrows, which cast the spell when they strike the target, or potions,
which have their effect on the person drinking them, or anything else
you can imagine. You may also make fewer charges than your Lab Total
would permit, if you so desire.

Charged items may be of any material or size, as they do not have to
hold vis. Appropriate shapes and materials do grant bonuses to the Lab
Total, as normal.

Charged Items Example

Mari Amwithig wants to make a wand that casts *Agony of the Beast,* but
she doesn\'t have much vis, so she considers doing it as a charged item.

*Agony of the Beast* is a level 15 effect, and for a charged item she
decides to leave it unchanged. She isn\'t planning to use the item
against creatures with Magic Resistance, and it doesn\'t really matter
if other people can use it.

Her Perdo Animal Lab Total is 15 (Perdo 12 + 3 from Puissant Art) + 7
(Animal) + 3 (Intelligence) +4 (Magic Theory) +5 (Magic aura at Semita
Errabunda), a total of 34. As she knows the spell, she adds a similar
spell bonus of +3, because the spell is third magnitude. In addition, a
wand gives a +4 bonus to destroying things at a distance. This gives her
a final total of 41. She could create the item even if she didn\'t know
the spell, but she does get some benefit from her prior knowledge.

41 is 26 higher than the level of the effect, which means she gets six
charges, five from the five fives by which she exceeds the level, and
one from the one point that is the final fraction.

Neil, Mari\'s player, decides to look at making a lesser enchanted item
instead, because Mari\'s Lab Total is a lot higher than the level of the
spell.

Shape and Material

The first thing you must do for any magical device is choose the
physical form of the item you wish to enchant --- both the shape of the
item and the item\'s material. Look at the Shape and Material Bonuses
Table to see what sorts of items grant bonuses relevant to the types of
enchantments you wish to place. An item with multiple materials and
incorporating multiple shapes can grant several bonuses, and they do
stack. However, the highest bonus that you can receive to a single
enchantment is equal to your Magic Theory --- this represents your
ability to tie all of the correspondences into your enchantment. It is
possible to place an effect in an item that does not give any bonus to
that effect, and a magus may want to do so if placing multiple effects
in the same item. For a single effect, however, it normally makes sense
to choose a shape of material that does offer a bonus.

You should also pay attention to mundane criteria as well as magical.
Enchanting a gold sword might appeal to you, but such an item would be
too heavy and soft to use in combat. And while a diamond might be
perfect for your ring, do you have a diamond? You might have to go out
into the dangerous world to find your materials, especially if your
covenant is poor.

Before you begin the process of enchantment, you must acquire the item
you will enchant, and note its size and composition.

Enchanted Item Example

Mari turns her attention to making her wand as a real enchanted item. A
wand gives a +4 bonus to destroy things at a distance, which makes it a
good choice. Animal bone also gives a +4 bonus. Unfortunately, Mari\'s
Magic Theory is only 4, so she would get no additional bonus from making
her wand from animal bone. She decides to stick with wood, which is less
conspicuous.

Preparation for Enchantment

Invested devices are powerful items that require special preparation
before any effective enchantments can be performed on them.

Once you have the physical item to enchant, you must spend a season
preparing it. To do this, you must simply expend the time and a number
of pawns of raw Vim vis equal to the number derived from the \"Material
and Size Table\" for the form you have selected.

It is possible to enchant only part of an item. For example, you can
enchant a ruby on the end of a staff. Because it is on a staff, the gem
gains bonuses appropriate to the shape (but not the material) of the
staff (see the Shape and Material Bonuses Table), and you don\'t have to
enchant the whole staff. However, any effect that relies on the
attachment of gem and staff for a bonus (for example, any spell in the
gem that uses a Shape bonus for the staff) is permanently lost if the
two are separated. When you enchant a part of an item, you must use the
number of pawns of vis that would be required to enchant that part if it
were a separate item.

It is also possible to prepare a compound item for enchantment, so that
you get the shape and material bonuses from all the components for all
effects. For example, you might want to enchant a wooden staff, shod in
iron, with a quartz crystal bound on the top. There are two ways to do
this, but you must select one when the item is first prepared, and the
choice cannot be changed later. Work out how many pawns of vis it would
take to prepare each component for enchantment. You may then either
prepare it with a number of pawns equal to the sum of the pawns for each
component, or with a number of pawns equal to the highest required by a
single component. The example staff would take eight pawns to prepare
the staff alone (a large wooden item), five pawns for the iron shoeing
(tiny base metal item), and twelve pawns for the quartz (tiny
semi-precious gem). Thus, the whole complex can be prepared at a cost of
twelve pawns or twenty five pawns. A compound item of this sort may not
contain more components than your Magic Theory score, as binding
disparate things together magically takes some skill.

It is not possible to \'partially\' open a single item. For example, a
wooden staff must always be opened with eight pawns of vis; it is not
possible to use fewer. It is possible for an item to have a vis capacity
that makes it impossible for a magus to open it for enchantment, due to
the limit on the number of pawns of vis he can use in a single season.

It is possible to prepare even larger items than "huge" items on the
table. The multiplier increases by one for every factor of ten by which
the item is larger than a huge item; for example, something one hundred
times the size of a small room, such as a castle keep, would have a
multiplier of x7. There are two problems that make this very uncommon.
The first, which is less serious, is that the whole item must be opened,
which requires the magus to handle a large amount of vis. The more
serious issue is that the whole item must be inside the magus's
laboratory. Even one factor of 10 makes an item too large to fit in a
standard Hermetic laboratory; see page @@ for rules for making a larger
laboratory.

An item that has been prepared for enchantment is useless for any
magical purpose until it is attuned as a talisman, or instilled with
magical powers.

Material and Size Tables

**Material Base Points**

cloth, glass 1

wood, leather 2

bone, soft stone 3

hard stone 4

base metal 5

silver 6

gold 10

semi-precious gem 12

precious gem 15

priceless gem 20

**Size Example Multiplier**

tiny ring, bracelet, pendant, any gem x1

small wand, dagger, belt, cap x2

medium sword, tunic, boots, skull x3

large staff, shield, cloak, skeleton x4

huge boat, wagon, human body, small room x5

Enchanted Item Example

A wooden wand is a small wooden object, and thus can only contain four
pawns of vis. As Mari is making a Lesser Enchantment she doesn\'t need
to open the item, but she can still only invest four pawns worth of
effects. This isn\'t a problem; with a Lab Total of 41 the highest level
effect she can invest is 20, which takes just two pawns.

Instilling Effects

The effects instilled in enchanted items are designed like spells, but
they are not spells. In particular, a magus may instill an effect in a
device even if he does not know a spell with the same effect. Designing
an effect takes no time above and beyond the time spent to instill the
effect in the item.

Designing the Effect

First, choose an effect to be invested in your device and determine its
level. An effect is like a spell, and must be fully defined, as a spell
is. You may base the effect on a spell from the Spells chapter, or may
invent your own effect. If inventing a new effect, you must design the
effect carefully, as if inventing a new spell. The level of the effect
is the equivalent of its spell level. You should confirm your effect
level with the troupe. Note the starting level of the effect, for future
reference. This is the effect level, and is used when assessing the
effects produced by the enchanted device --- for example, whether they
cause Warping, or whether a maga succeeds in dispelling one. Choices
made in the rest of this process may change this level, determining the
modified effect level. This is used when dealing with the enchanted
device itself, for example when investing the effects in the laboratory,
or trying to disenchant a device.

Although the effect is based on the spell guidelines, it is not a spell,
and the magus need not know the spell that would correspond to the
effect. On the other hand, he gets a bonus if he does (see page @@).

In general, enchanted devices may not mimic the effects of ritual
spells. There is, however, a single exception. Enchanted device effects
may have a level over 50, as long as there is no other reason for the
spell to be a ritual, such as Year duration, Boundary target, or major
effect.

After laying out the parameters of the effect, you must decide how
frequently you use the effect. Consult the \"Effect Frequency Table.\"
The number you choose corresponds to a modifier, which is added to the
level of the effect.

Effect Frequency Table

Frequency Modifier

1 use per day 0

2 uses per day +1

3 uses per day +2

6 uses per day +3

12 uses per day +4

24 uses per day +5

50 uses per day +6

Unlimited +10

Next you must specify the conditions under which the effect is
triggered. A trigger can involve a command word or phrase, moving the
item in a specific way (for example, waving or pointing a wand), a
stance to be adopted, or anything physical that you can imagine. Most
enchanted items cannot read thoughts, so the trigger action must be
physical, not mental. By default, the trigger action must be performed
by someone holding the item, although intention does not matter. Wands
with offensive powers usually have very specific triggers, to make sure
that they do not go off by accident; some other items trigger whenever
they are put on.

It is possible to modify an effect (see below) so that it is triggered
by conditions in its immediate environment. This might include an item
that triggers at sunrise and sunset.

Effects can also be linked to a second effect (see below) so that they
trigger depending on the result of the second effect. By linking an
effect to an Intellego Mentem effect which works whenever the device is
held it is possible to produce an effect triggered by thought or
intention. Any number of effects can be linked to a single triggering,
and may depend in different ways on the result of that effect. Thus, if
two powers are linked to a mind-reading effect, one might trigger when
the wielder thinks \'Fire\' with the intention of activating the item,
and the other when the wielder thinks \'Ice\' with the same intention.

Effect Modifications

You have some options on how effects in an enchanted device operate.
They are listed below. These modifications change the \"standards\" for
enchanted devices.

**Penetration:** You may elect to give the effect non-zero Penetration.
For every level you add to the effect\'s level, that effect gets +2
Penetration. If there are multiple effects in a device, each must be
given a Penetration score separately.

**Concentration:** When investing an effect, you can arrange to have the
device maintain concentration on the effect for the wielder. This option
adds +5 to the effect\'s level. Note that the wielder still needs to
concentrate to change how the effect is used. For instance, a levitation
belt that does not require concentration can hold someone in the air,
but to move up or down the wielder must concentrate. Effects left to
their own concentration start to wear off at sunset and sunrise. At
these times the wielder must concentrate on the effect for a few moments
to perpetuate it until the next sunrise or sunset, whichever comes
first. This effect is useful for things like invisibility rings, which
have their effect when put on, and then maintain concentration and
invisibility until removed. This allows the wearer to end the effect at
will, and start it again if the device still has uses left.

The item can only maintain one instance of the effect at a time, unless
the same effect is invested in the same item multiple times. For
example, a wand of invisibility that can make a person invisible six
times per day and maintain concentration can only make one person
invisible at a time. However, if the wand were instead invested with six
effects each of which could be used once per day, and maintained
concentration, then it could make six people invisible at once. This
would require more vis, more seasons, and a different trigger for each
effect.

**Effect Use:** You can restrict the use of a device\'s effect to a
specific list of people (for example, to you and all your current
apprentices) by adding +3 to the level of the effect. You work the
identities of these people into the enchantment itself, so the list can
never be changed, nor can the restriction be bypassed.

You may also restrict the use of the device to an undefined group, such
as \'only women\', or \'only people in my direct magical lineage\' by
using a linked trigger (see below).

Otherwise, invested devices can be activated by anyone who knows their
trigger actions.

**Effect Expiry:** It is possible to instill an effect which will only
work for a limited period. This period is counted from the first use of
the effect, not from its creation. A single item may mix temporary and
permanent effects. Limiting an effect in this way multiplies the amount
by which the magus\'s Lab Total exceeds the modified level of the
effect, allowing him to instill effects more quickly. It does not allow
him to instill effects he could not otherwise manage. Effect Expiry
cannot be applied to Lesser Enchanted Items or Charged Items.

Item Lasts Excess Modifier

1 year x10

7 years x5

70 years x2

**Environmental Trigger:** The effect is triggered by some feature of
the item\'s environment, rather than a specific action. The item is only
sensitive to major magical features of the environment. Thus, it can
respond to the events that end spell durations (sunrise, sunset, phases
of the moon, etc.), and to changes in the modifier applied to magical
activities by the local aura. This adds +3 to the level of the effect.

**Fast Trigger:** The effect gains a +3 Initiative modifier. This adds
+5 to the level of the effect.

Constant Effect Devices

An enchanted device can have a constant effect by giving the effect a
duration of Sun, two uses per day, and an environmental trigger (sunrise
or sunset). This adds two magnitudes (to raise the duration to Sun) and
four levels (one for two uses per day and three for an environmental
trigger) to the guideline given in the Spells chapter for the effect.
Such a device has a truly continuous effect; there are no \'flickers\'
at sunrise or sunset.

**Linked Trigger:** The effect is triggered by the results of another
effect in the same item. This is most commonly used to allow an item to
activate on a mental command, or to limit the people who can use an
item. An effect to allow mental activation needs to be able to read
surface thoughts continually, with at least Touch Range. This is a base
level of 15, +1 magnitude for Touch Range, +1 magnitude for
Concentration Duration, +5 levels to have the device maintain
concentration, for a final level of 30.

If a linked trigger effect is resisted, the item will not work, but the
wielder can choose not to resist.

A linked trigger adds +3 to the level of the triggered effect. The level
of the triggering effect is not altered.

Enchanted Item Example

Mari doesn\'t want any Penetration, and just wants the basic *Agony of
the Beast* effect. That sets the base level at 15. Neil notes that he
can raise the level to 20 without the process costing any more vis or
taking any longer, so he might as well. The only addition that seems
worthwhile is additional uses per day, so he decides to have Mari make a
wand that can be used 24 times per day, as that adds five levels to the
base fifteen, for a final level of 20.

Instilling the Effect

Once you have designed the effect that you want to invest in your
device, you have to perform the ritual of joining. Your Lab Total (based
on the Form and Technique scores appropriate to the effect) is compared
to the total modified effect level. Several other modifiers apply to
your Lab Total:

If the effect you are investing mimics a spell with casting requisites,
those requisites apply to your Lab Total.

If any of the bonuses listed on the \"Shape and Material Bonuses Table\"
for the material or shape of the device you are using matches the effect
being invested, thoses bonuses are added to your Lab Total. For example,
if you were enchanting a lamp to constantly produce magical light, you
would add +7 to your Lab Total. Your total bonus from the shape and
material of the device may not exceed your Magic Theory score. This
represents the ability of the magus to tie all the correspondences into
the enchantment.

For each effect already in the device that has a Technique and/or Form
in common with the effect being invested, add +1 to your Lab Total. The
bonus is +1 per pre-existing effect, even if it matches both the
Technique and Form.

If you know a spell that is similar to the effect you are instilling,
add the magnitude of the spell to your Lab Total. You only get this
bonus for the highest-level applicable spell.

You can only invest an effect if this modified Lab Total exceeds the
modified level of the effect. For each point by which your total exceeds
the level, you accumulate 1 point per season. When you accumulate points
equal to the effect\'s modified level, you invest the power. Thus, if
your Lab Total is double the modified level of the effect, you can
invest it in one season. For lesser enchantments, your Lab Total must be
at least double the modified level of the effect.

For every 10 points, or fraction thereof, of the modified level of the
effect, you must also expend one pawn of raw vis of an Art matching
either the Technique or Form of the effect being invested. This vis is
expended in the first season you begin investing the effect. But
remember, a given item can only hold a limited number of effects. If the
amount of raw vis required to instill an effect brings the total amount
of raw vis used above the total used to prepare the item for enchantment
in the first place, the effect cannot be invested. So if you are
enchanting a silver dagger (which takes 12 pawns of vis to prepare for
enchantment), you can only put 12 pawns worth of effects in it. If the
dagger already has 10 pawns worth of effects, an effect that requires 3
pawns of vis (that is, an effect of level 21 to 30) does not fit; you
cannot put it in the dagger.

Enchanted Item Example

Mari has, as calculated before, a Perdo Animal Lab Total of 41, which
allows her to invest a level 20 effect in a single season. She gets one
pawn of Perdo vis and one pawn of Animal vis, and uses them to invest
the wand. The process is automatically successful.

*Wand of Bestial Agony:* This plain wooden wand can cast *Agony of the
Beast* 24 times per day, with 0 Penetration.

Using Enchanted Devices

Several rules apply to all enchanted devices, unless an effect
modification has been made, and specifically states otherwise.

Effects produced by enchanted devices have a Penetration of zero.

The range of effects is measured from the device, not the user. Thus,
Touch Range means that the device must touch the target, and Personal
Range means that the effect targets the device only.

Unless otherwise specified, an effect that duplicates a spell requiring
concentration to maintain also must be concentrated on to be maintained.

All Targeting rolls demanded by a device\'s effects are made by the
wielder of the device, using the wielder\'s Finesse score.

If a person gains possession of your magical device and knows the
triggering actions of its effects, that person may utilize the device.
Even if the possessor does not know the triggering action, he may
investigate your item in the laboratory to learn its effects.

You may perform one trigger action for an enchanted item in a round. In
most cases, this will activate one effect, but some items may be
designed so that one action activates multiple effects. You must make
any Targeting rolls that are necessary, but do not roll for Fatigue. You
use an enchanted device at an Initiative point equal to Qik + Stress
Die.

If the enchanted device is broken, all its powers are lost.

You may use an enchanted item before it is \"filled up\" with effects
and still add effects later.

Talisman Attunement

Talismans help you concentrate and extend your magical powers. A
talisman is a very personal item that contains magics and materials that
tie it intimately to you and that can be used as a channel for your
magical power.

You can only attune an item as your talisman if you prepared it for
enchantment yourself. Attuning an item takes one season, and can be done
whatever your Lab Total. A magus can only have one talisman at once, and
must completely destroy an older talisman before creating a new one.
This means that the vis and time invested in the first talisman are
lost. A magus cannot make a talisman for someone else.

A magus may attune an item with instilled effects as his talisman, as
long as he instilled all the effects personally. An item which has been
worked on by more than one magus cannot be attuned as a talisman. It is,
however, possible to attune an enchanted item if the primary creator was
assisted in the lab by another Gifted individual (see Assistance in the
Laboratory, page @@).

Attuning an item as your talisman has several effects.

First, your talisman is considered to be a part of you as long as you
are touching it. Personal range spells can affect your talisman,
Personal range effects in the talisman can affect you, and you count as
touching anything that your talisman is touching, so if your talisman is
a staff your reach is significantly extended. This also means that your
Magic Resistance covers your talisman completely as long as you are
touching it.

Second, you always have an Arcane Connection to your talisman, making it
easy to find if it is lost (but also making it a hazard if it falls into
enemy hands).

Third, even when you\'re not touching your talisman, it receives the
Magic Resistance offered by your Form scores.

Finally, a talisman becomes very easy to enchant, and its capacity for
enchantment is greatly increased. The capacity of a talisman is
independent of its shape and material, and instead depends on the power
of the magus to whom it is attuned. The maximum number of pawns of Vim
vis that may be used to prepare a talisman is equal to the sum of the
magus\'s highest Technique and highest Form. Unlike other items, the
capacity of a talisman may be opened a bit at a time. A magus could open
one pawn\'s worth every season if he wished, although that is
inefficient.

When a magus instills effects into a talisman, he gets a +5 bonus to his
Lab Total, reflecting his close connection to the item. However, it is
impossible for any other magus to instill an effect in the device.

In addition to the basic powers of a talisman, you may also open your
talisman to one kind of magic attunement, based on the shape and
material of the talisman, every time you prepare it for enchantment or
instill an effect. Use the \"Shape and Material Bonuses Table\" to
determine what attunements are possible. Your talisman may be able to
accept more than one kind of attunement, and can hold more than one
attunement, but you can only invest one new attunement per season. For
instance, a magus can enhance his staff talisman by attuning it to
spells that control things at a distance. He then gets a +4 bonus on his
Casting Score for spells that control things at a distance (because that
is the bonus listed on the Shape and Material Bonuses Table). He could
further enhance it to give him a +3 to project bolts and missiles (for
example), but that would have to be done while he was instilling another
effect.

Bonuses from attunements only apply when the magus is touching the
talisman, and only the highest bonus applies. They apply to Casting
Scores for Ritual, Formulaic and Spontaneous magic, but they do not
apply to Magic Resistance or any laboratory activities. There is no
limit to the number of attunements a talisman can have at one time,
though remember that you can only add one per season. There is no roll
involved in giving your talisman an attunement bonus.

Investigating Enchantments

If you wish to determine the powers of someone else\'s enchantment, you
must investigate it in your lab. You inspect the item\'s physical
construction, investigate the Form and Technique with Intellego magics,
and test to see how the enchantment responds to other magics. All of
this indicates how the item was created, what its powers are, and how to
unleash them.

You discover the powers in an enchanted device in order from weakest to
strongest --- that is, from the power of the lowest modified effect
level to that of the highest. (A device\'s function as a talisman is
treated as a level 20 power.) When you investigate an enchantment for
the first time, you spend a season, add a stress die to your Intellego
Vim Lab Total, and compare the result to the level of the weakest power
in the enchantment. If you succeed in your roll to find the weakest
power, you may roll again in that same season to identify the power
immediately above it in strength. For example, if a device has three
powers of level 10, 20, and 30 and you rolled a Lab Total of 25, you do
not automatically find the first two powers. As your rolled Lab Total is
over 10 (the level of the first power), you find the first power and may
roll again in the season to find the second power (level 20), and the
third power if you discover the second. Note that the level of a power
in an enchanted device includes any effect modifications that apply to
the power.

As long as you succeed in finding powers, you keep rolling to find more
in that season. If you roll and find nothing, it either means that there
are no more powers in the enchantment or that you did not roll high
enough to find the next one. Only the storyguide knows for certain. In
either case, you can keep trying as long as you want, but each failure
to discover a power ends the rolls for that season, and you can do
nothing else that season.

If you botch an investigation roll, many results can arise, and the
storyguide makes the final decision based on the situation. You could
misinterpret a power, thinking it does something different from its
actual function. You could misread the triggering action of a power,
making it useless to you. Or you could somehow disturb the enchanted
item, setting off its powers. If you survive an investigation botch,
your season ends there. However, you may approach the device again next
season to properly identify the power that confounded you.

Magi sometimes use the Waiting Spell (see page @@) to guard their
enchanted devices. The spell held in waiting is often released on anyone
who magically examines the item. The Waiting Spell is not invested into
the device, but cast on it for protection. You therefore cannot detect a
Waiting Spell in your preliminary investigations of an item. If you do
not cast a spell to detect a Waiting Spell, discovering it often means
tripping it. Beware.

Similar Spells

A magus gets some benefit from knowing a spell similar to the effect he
is creating. He gets a bonus to his Lab Total equal to the magnitude of
the highest-level similar spell that he knows. Only a single spell
grants a bonus; there is no laboratory advantage to knowing dozens of
similar spells.

**Similar Spell Bonus:** **Magnitude of highest-level similar spell
known**

A spell is similar if it meets one of the following requirements:

Same effect, at a different Range, Duration, or Target. All three may
differ.

Closely related effect, at the same Range, Duration, and Target.

Two spells have the same effect if the rules description of the spell is
the same, apart from the Range, Duration, or Target. Closely related
effects include such things as doing damage with Creo Ignem, or turning
a human being into a land animal. This is, ultimately, a judgment call
on the part of the troupe. The similar spell bonus is not, generally,
very large, so there is no problem with erring on the side of
generosity.

Longevity Rituals

Your time to study and increase your power has an ultimate deadline:
your inevitable demise. In their attempts to gain themselves more time
in this world, the magi of Hermes have developed Longevity Rituals.
Though death is still inevitable, these rituals can stave it off for a
hundred years or more. Magi of two hundred years or older are rare, but
not unheard of.

The Longevity Ritual creates a magical anchor, sustaining the vital life
force of the magus, often by directly affecting the tissues of the
magus\'s body. This anchor, however, prevents the magus from expending
his life force in normal human fashion, so the magus becomes permanently
sterile. The ritual takes a season, and culminates in some sort of
focus, which is appropriate to the magus in question. The most common
form of the focus is a potion which the magus drinks, but it could be a
bath, a ritual in which the magus inhales the smoke of special incense,
or even a magical fire that the magus stands within to burn away the
impurities that cause aging. The focus is always something that can be
repeated, and does not require continuing actions or the possession of
an object. Magi who have a potion as a focus often refer to their
longevity potion; magi with different foci use different terms as
appropriate, but if they feel that the nature of the focus is too
revealing, they might refer simply to the Longevity Ritual.

The Longevity Ritual takes one season to develop and perform, and the
subject of the ritual must be present for the whole of that season. If
appropriate, he may help the magus creating the ritual with his lab work
(see page @@).

Every magus has a unique Longevity Ritual, though it is possible for a
magus to create a Longevity Ritual for another. Indeed, many young magi
hire older magi to devise their Longevity Rituals, as the older magus\'s
higher Lab Total makes the ritual much more effective. It is most common
for a magus to pay his parens for this, and in some parts of the Order
this is almost an expected custom.

**Longevity Ritual: +1 bonus for every five points or fraction of Creo
Corpus Lab Total**

**Longevity Ritual Vis Cost: 1 pawn for every five years of age (rounded
up)**

Normally, only Creo, Corpus, and Vim vis may be used in a Longevity
Ritual. However, a Longevity Ritual is a very personal creation, and as
such, it is uniquely tied to your magical abilities. You may, with the
approval of the troupe or storyguide, substitute any type of vis that
your magical talents are strongly associated with.

A Longevity Ritual\'s effect lasts until you suffer an aging crisis (see
\"Aging\" on page @@). After this, the ritual loses its effectiveness
and the focus must be repeated. You can invent a new ritual (following
the normal rules for doing so), or perform the ritual from the old
ritual again. This involves simply making a new investment of vis (of an
amount based on your current age) but no significant investment in time.
You must have the Laboratory Text (see page @@) from the original ritual
to do this, and this is the only benefit from a Longevity Ritual\'s
Laboratory Text. If your Longevity Ritual fails and you make aging rolls
before you create a new one, you suffer the full effects of your age.
You do not gain back any Aging Points or Decrepitude Points that you
suffered when you were not under the effects of a ritual when you do
finally perform a new ritual.

When creating a Longevity Ritual for the first time, you can increase
its potency by adding extra vis to the ceremony. This vis is above and
beyond that which you must spend for your current age. For each
additional pawn you add to the ritual, add 1 to your Lab Total. This vis
is invested when you originally create a given version of a ritual, but
you must use the same amount of extra vis every time you perform the
focus again after the ritual fails. If you reinvent the ritual to take
advantage of increased Art scores, you can choose not to use extra vis.

You can perform Longevity Rituals for others, even for non-magi. To do
so, you need a Creo Corpus Lab Total of at least 30. A Longevity Ritual
made for another magus or a character with a Supernatural Ability
functions just as if made for you (--1 to aging rolls for every 5 points
of Lab Total). Non-magical people, however, are not as resilient as
magi. The ritual you create for a mundane therefore only subtracts one
from the character\'s aging rolls for every 10 points (round up) in your
Lab Total. A Longevity Ritual performed for someone else also fails when
the subject suffers from an aging crisis. If the subject is a magus and
has access to the Laboratory Text, he may perform the ritual himself.
(Vis usage is limited by the magus\'s Arts, as for a spell, which may
make it impossible.) As the magus was present for the original creation
of the ritual, and quite possibly assisting in it, he understands the
shorthand. A subject who is not a Hermetic magus may not repeat the
ritual. Any magus with access to the Laboratory Text may do this, no
matter what his Lab Total, but a magus who was not involved in the
initial creation needs an accessible Laboratory Text.

Laboratory Texts

When a magus creates something in the laboratory, he keeps a set of
notes recording what he has done, what worked, and what didn\'t. With
the aid of these notes he, or another magus, can reproduce the effect
much more quickly, as he knows exactly what he should be doing.

One Laboratory Text is created for every effect that the magus creates.
Thus, a magus creates a single Laboratory Text when he invents a single
spell, or invests a single power into an enchanted item.

The most common Laboratory Texts in the Order of Hermes are those
detailing the creation of spells. Almost every covenant has a
substantial collection of these, as they at least double the speed at
which magi can add new Formulaic spells to their repertoire.

Using Laboratory Texts

A magus who has a Laboratory Text for a particular effect may reproduce
it in a single season if his Lab Total equals or exceeds the level of
the effect. If his Lab Total is less than the level of the effect, he
may not use the Laboratory Text until his Lab Total increases to be at
least equal to the level. A magus may reproduce multiple effects if they
are all of the same Technique and Form, and the total of their levels is
no greater than his Lab Total. The Lab Total is calculated in exactly
the same way when working from a Laboratory Text as when working without
one.

This is an almost exact reproduction of the original effect. No features
of a spell or enchanted item effect may be changed, and in the case of
an enchanted item, the item itself must have the same shape and material
as the one described in the text. However, it is possible to use a text
derived from enchanting a power into an item with multiple powers to
enchant that power alone. It is not possible to use the Laboratory Text
from a lesser enchanted device to instill a power in a greater device,
or vice versa, nor can any other magus make use of a Lab Text concerned
with instilling an effect into a talisman. The main difference between
the two effects is that your sigil, rather than the original magus\'s,
is incorporated.

If the Laboratory Text is for a charged item, the magus produces an item
with a number of charges equal to one fifth of his Lab Total, rounded
up.

The Laboratory Text for a Longevity Ritual only allows the magus to
reproduce the final ritual without needing to spend a season on the
process.

It is not possible to experiment (see page @@) while working from a
Laboratory Text. The benefit comes from following the procedures
exactly, which is inconsistent with experimentation. It is, of course,
possible to look at a Laboratory Text and then experiment to create an
almost identical effect, but the magus would get no benefit from the
Laboratory Text.

Laboratory Texts Example

Carolus decides that he needs at least one combat spell, or he risks
being in serious trouble if he gets caught stealing. Given his magical
strengths, he decides to look at Perdo Corpus. His Perdo Corpus Lab
Total is 10 (Perdo) + 5 (Corpus) + 2 (Intelligence) + 4 (Magic Theory) +
1 (Magic Theory is specialized in inventing spells) + 5 (Aura of Semita
Errabunda), for a total of 27. He could invent a level 13 spell by
himself in a season, but that wouldn\'t be much use.

Fortunately, the covenant library has a Lab Text for *Grip of the
Choking Hand*. This spell is level 25, which would take him 13 seasons
to invent by himself. His Lab Total is 2 higher than the level, so after
thirteen seasons he would have accumulated 26 points, and thus invented
the spell. Working from the Lab Text, however, he can invent the spell
in a single season.

Writing Laboratory Texts

You produce a Laboratory Text as you create an effect, and this requires
no extra time. These Laboratory Texts are not immediately useful to
others, however, as they include all sorts of personal abbreviations and
shortcuts that others cannot understand. (Remember that everything is
written by hand in the Middle Ages.)

If you would like to copy a Laboratory Text of yours so others can
easily use it, you can spend a season rewriting up to (Latin x 20)
levels of Laboratory Texts to make them usable by others. Also, in one
season, you can copy (Profession: Scribe x 60) levels of Laboratory
Texts that are already written understandably. Note that copying is a
different skill from writing from scratch. It is entirely possible for a
skilled writer to be faster at writing than copying.

Any person who assisted in a particular Laboratory Activity, adding
their Intelligence + Magic Theory to the Lab Total, understands the
Laboratory Texts produced for that activity without needing to translate
them, and may make generally accessible copies. This also applies to a
magus who is the subject of a Longevity Ritual created by another magus,
even if he does not assist. Assistants do not, however, create
Laboratory Texts.

**Writing Laboratory Texts:** Latin x 20 levels per season

**Copying Laboratory Texts:** Profession: Scribe x 60 levels per season

Casting Tablets

A Casting Tablet is a variant on a Laboratory Text that contains a
simple series of instructions for casting a particular spell. Magi who
have not learned the spell\'s intricacies through laboratory research
may use a Casting Tablet instead. Casting from tablets is dangerous,
because the magus is calling on power that he cannot control accurately.
Casting from tablets is also an inflexible style of spellcasting.

A magus casting from a tablet does not understand the spell\'s workings,
and so may not tinker with decisions made by the author. The Range,
Duration, Target, and size of the spell, the exact amount and Arts of
raw vis consumed, and any single type of Arcane Connection to be used,
are specified by the author at writing. Spells cast from tablets do not
have Penetration bonuses unless they are built into the spell\'s level
by the author.

Rituals may be cast from tablets. It is possible, but dangerous, for a
magus with a tablet to lead a *Wizard's Vigil.* A botch by any member of
the group causes the leader also to botch. An odd effect of casting from
a tablet is that the sigil of the writer is preserved in the spell, and
is visible along with the sigil of the caster.

When casting from a tablet, determine the magus's Casting Total
according to the following formula, then subtract the spell level from
the Casting Total and look up the result on the table that follows. Use
this formula for both Formulaic and Ritual spells. The table replaces
the normal results for casting either type of spell. For Formulaic
spells, the Fatigue levels lost are short-term, and for Ritual spells
they are long-term.

Casting total: Stamina + Form + Technique + Aura + stress die (modified
by Virtues, Flaws and requisites).

Casting total -- spell level:

0 or more. Spell cast, lose one Fatigue level.

--1 to --10: Spell cast, lose two Fatigue levels.

--11 to --20: Spell cast, lose three Fatigue levels.

--21 to --30: Spell cast. Gain a Warping point. Lose four Fatigue
levels.

--31 or less: Gain Warping points equal to the magnitude of the spell,
lose five Fatigue levels. If the caster gains two or more Warping
Points, he must check for Twilight.

Magi can only author Casting Tablets for spells they have mastered (see
page @@), although anyone can copy tablets written by others. A
character spending a season as an author or copyist may create
Laboratory Texts or Casting Tablets from the same pool of levels.
Casting Tablets do not aid magi to learn spells the way Laboratory Texts
do.

Translating Laboratory Texts

If you want to translate the Laboratory Texts of another magus whose
secrets and abbreviations you do not know, you must work out his system
of abbreviations. Every season you spend studying one of his texts, you
accumulate a number of points equal to your Lab Total in the appropriate
Technique and Form. Once you have accumulated points equal to or
exceeding the level of the effect, you understand the text. This is a
process of experimentation, and thus requires a laboratory.

Once you have understood a magus\'s abbreviations for one Laboratory
Text, you may write up any of his Laboratory Texts as if they were your
own (that is, Latin x 20 levels per season), as long as none of them
exceed the level of the text you decoded. This is a simple process of
translation, and does not require a laboratory. If you come across a
higher level text, you must decode that separately, but you start with a
number of accumulated points equal to the level of the highest level
text you have translated. Note that Laboratory Texts cannot be
translated into Casting Tablets.

As noted above, laboratory assistants automatically understand the
Laboratory Texts for the activities with which they helped. This also
helps them to translate other Laboratory Texts by the same magus. A
magus may also teach someone his (or another maga's) abbreviations, by
spending a season writing Laboratory Texts with that person present, and
explaining the abbreviations. In that case, the student counts as
understanding Laboratory Texts by that magus with a level up to the
teacher's Latin x 20. Note that such students need not have The Gift,
but must be literate in Latin and have a score of at least 1 in Magic
Theory to write or copy Laboratory Texts without corrupting them (see
page @@).

Multiple Laboratory Activities

Sometimes you may wish to perform laboratory activities that, though
rewarding, are well within your capabilities. In this case, you may
choose to perform multiple activities within a single season, splitting
your time among them all. All the activities you perform in a season
must be of the same type (for example, learning spells, instilling
powers in an invested device, creating potions) and must use the same
Technique and Form. Some or all of the activities may be based on
Laboratory Texts. To perform multiple activities, simply add up the
levels of all activities performed and apply your Lab Total to the total
of the levels.

If the Lab Totals for the different activities are different, due to
requisites, a Magical Focus, or similar, apply the lowest of the Lab
Totals to the total of the levels.

If you perform arcane experimentation (page @@), you add a single simple
die + risk modifier to your Lab Total, but any results rolled on the
\"Extraordinary Results Chart\" apply to all activities performed in the
season.

Help in the Laboratory

Though the Code of Hermes provides protection for magi who meet on
neutral grounds, the sanctum of a magus (laboratory and living quarters)
is a special place in which magi hold their greatest treasures and
deepest secrets. Thus, the Code of Hermes allows for magi to exact any
toll on magi who trespass within their sancta. Because one magus
foregoes protection of the Code when in the laboratory sanctum of
another, very few magi ever cooperate in laboratory work.

Nevertheless, there are times when magi receive help in their laboratory
work, either from trusting magi or from apprentices. Anyone who has The
Gift and a score of at least one in Magic Theory may help you to perform
any activity that uses your Magic Theory. If you are being helped to
perform some activity that uses your Magic Theory, you add the helper\'s
Intelligence + Magic Theory to your Lab Total for the season. Any
helper's Virtues and Flaws affect the Lab Total, in the same way as
those of the primary magus. If this total is negative, the \'assistant\'
imposes a penalty on your Lab Total. If the assistant has some
appropriate Virtue or Flaw, like Inventive Genius, that Virtue or Flaw
applies to the primary researcher\'s efforts.

Thus, when two magi cooperate, one must always be the primary researcher
and one must be the assistant. This research may take place outside the
sanctum of either magus (see The Sanctum, page @@), in which case both
parties are protected by the Code. However, the assistant is announcing
to the Order that he considers the primary researcher to be his
superior. This substantially limits the range of magi that most members
of the Order are willing to assist. A magus is conventionally supposed
to regard his parens as superior throughout his life, so helping your
parens attracts no stigma, even for those magi who actually regard their
parentes with contempt.

You may not normally have more than one helper in the lab, as it is
difficult to coordinate several helpers with you and with each other.
However, if people are exceptionally well-organized and cooperative,
more can work together, each helper adding his Magic Theory and
Intelligence scores to the primary researcher\'s scores. The total
number of assistants that the primary researcher can make use of in one
season is limited to his Leadership score (though he can always have at
least one). The exception is that a magus with a familiar may always
have at least one assistant in addition to his familiar; this does not
increase the maximum if he has a Leadership score of 2 or more.

Lab assistants gain exposure experience, typically in Magic Theory, but
do not gain anything else from the experience.

Distractions from Lab Work

The rules for what a magus can do in a season assume that the season is
uninterrupted. Sometimes, however, magi take time away from their labs
to travel and explore, and this lost time makes itself felt in their lab
performance.

You may miss up to ten days from any laboratory activity, and make up
the time by working harder during the remainder of the season. There is
no penalty for this. However, if you miss eleven days or more, your Lab
Total is penalized by 10 points, plus two points for every day over ten
that you miss, up to a maximum penalty of 30 when you miss twenty days.
If you miss more than twenty days, you cannot perform a laboratory
activity at all, as you lose your synchronization with the cycles of the
heavens.

Familiars

Protective of their secrets and suspicious of any who might hold power
over them, magi are notoriously distant from other people. They can find
some companionship with apprentices, but the master-apprentice bond
often atrophies after the apprentice becomes a magus, and sometimes
former master and former apprentice become rivals. For longer-lasting
and deeper companionship, many magi turn to a familiar.

A familiar is a beast that a magus befriends and then magically bonds
with, instilling the beast with magical powers in the process and then
using magic to merge its powers and abilities with his own. Though a
familiar is very close to the magus who creates it, it always has its
own will, and is not under the control of the magus. The familiar is the
closest friend and ally a magus will ever have... but even friends fight
occasionally.

Finding and Befriending an Animal

The first step in getting a familiar is finding an animal with inherent
magic. With inherent magic, the beast is likely to have a Magic Might
score, which may be assigned based on the scores of comparable magical
creatures. The means of finding such a creature are ultimately left to
the storyguide to determine. Wandering at random in search of a magical
creature is usually profitless --- magi generally follow rumors to the
locations of the familiars they want. Some receive visions of animals
that are somehow \"meant\" for them.

Once found, the animal must be befriended. You must genuinely admire or
even love the animal in question, and it must trust you freely, under no
coercion, magical or mundane. The animal can sense something of your
nature when you are in close contact. If your natures clash, it rejects
you. The need for mutual admiration between magus and familiar is why
air magi, for example, often take birds as familiars, and why you can
often tell something about magi by the familiars they have chosen and
that have chosen them.

Suggested Familiars by Art

The Arts used to bond a familiar must correspond to either the animal
itself, or its powers. The following list gives examples of animals that
may be suited to particular Arts.

Creo: beaver, eagle, lizard, pelican, weasel, any animal that can
rejuvenate itself

Intellego: cat (tortoiseshell), crow, goat, raven, woodpecker, toad, any
animal with keen senses, any animal thought to foretell the future

Muto: cat (white or tortoiseshell), fox, hare, moths and butterflies,
toad, other amphibians

Perdo: asp, hedgehog, salamander, shrew, weasel, any venomous animal

Rego: badger, cat (black), cockerel, dog, lion, owl, wolf, any pack
leader or similarly dominant animal

Animal: any animal

Aquam: coot, duck, frog, kingfisher, otter, swan, any amphibious or
semi-aquatic animal

Auram: crow, kingfisher, spider, any bird or bat

Corpus: caladrius, cat, dog, goose

Herbam: beaver, monkey, squirrel, woodpecker

Ignem: eagle, hercinia, salamander, scitalis, very small dragons

Imaginem: chameleon (lizard), cricket, magpie, partridge, peacock,
scitalis

Mentem: ape, cat (black or tortoiseshell), fox, owl, wolf, any animal
with an Intelligence score (before bonding)

Terram: badger, hedgehog, ferret, frog, fox, mole, mouse

Vim: hoopoe, any magical animal

Enchanting the Familiar

Once you and the familiar accept each other, you take the animal to your
laboratory and begin a series of enchantments. Enchanting a familiar is
different from other enchantments. The bond between you and your
familiar causes changes to you both, and you do not have full control
over how the enchantment affects you. Your troupe and storyguide
determine how you are affected throughout the enchantment, though you do
have control over the changes your familiar undergoes.

The Initial Bond

The laboratory total for binding the familiar is any appropriate
Technique + any appropriate Form + Int + Magic Theory + Aura Modifier.
Puissant Arts and foci may apply to this. A Technique or Form is
appropriate if it corresponds in some way to the animal or its powers.
Thus, Animal and Vim are always appropriate Forms for binding magical
animals. Aquam is appropriate for aquatic or semi-aquatic animals, and
Auram for birds, or creatures with power over air or weather. Corpus
applies to animals that can take human form, or with powers to heal or
transform people. Herbam might be appropriate to arboreal creatures, or
to beasts with powers over plants. Ignem is suitable for fire-breathing
or shining creatures, and Imaginem for those that change their
appearance. Mentem fits any animal that has a true mind, or which can
affect the minds of people, while Terram is appropriate to burrowing
animals or creatures with powers affecting earth, stone, or metal.

The Techniques are more likely to correspond to abilities of the animal.
Builders, like beavers, correspond to Creo, while destroyers, like
serpents, link to Perdo. Creatures that change, such as butterflies,
match Muto, and those that control others, like the leaders of packs,
fit with Rego. Intellego is appropriate to animals with sharp senses,
like eagles or bats.

Any magus should be able to find an animal that he can bind with his
best Technique and Form, and such an animal will automatically be in
sympathy with the magus\'s magic.

The level for the enchantment is equal to 25 plus the familiar\'s Magic
Might plus 5 times its Size. If the familiar has negative Size, this
reduces the level for the enchantment. For example, a familiar with a
Size of --2 and a Magic Might of 10 can be bound as a level 25
enchantment: 10 for the Magic Might, plus 25, minus 10 from the negative
Size. A magus can only bind a familiar if his Lab Total equals or
exceeds this level. If it does, he can bind the familiar in a single
season. This costs one pawn of vis for every five points or fraction
thereof of the Lab Total. The vis used must match either the Technique
or the Form used in calculating the Lab Total, and the magus may use
both kinds.

**Familiar Bonding Lab Total: Any Technique + any Form + Intelligence +
Magic Theory + Aura Modifier**

**Familiar Bonding Level: Familiar\'s Magic Might + 25 + (5 x Size)**

**Familiar Bonding Cost: 1 pawn of vis per five levels or fraction of
the binding Lab Total. Vis must match Technique or Form**

The Three Cords

As part of the process of binding a familiar, the magus forges three
mystical cords. A golden cord connects the magus and familiar\'s magical
abilities, a silver cord connects their minds, and a bronze cord
connects their bodies. These cords may be seen by someone with the
Second Sight Virtue, but they are otherwise imperceptible.

The strength of each of these cords is rated from 0 to +5. To determine
all the cords\' ratings, divide the points of the magus\'s Lab Total
among them however you choose and then use the points allocated to each
to buy cord scores. A cord strength of 0 costs nothing, a strength of +1
requires 5 points, a score of +2 requires 15 points, a score of +3
requires 30 points, a score of +4 requires 50 points, and a score of +5
(the maximum) requires 75 points. The total cost of the cords you buy
cannot exceed the magus\'s Lab Total.

Each cord has a varying effect (described below) depending on how well
it is forged. These benefits also apply to the familiar.

**The Golden Cord:** The familiar helps you avoid magical errors,
letting you roll fewer botch rolls when using magic. Your golden cord
score is the number subtracted from the number of botch dice you would
normally roll (though the Golden Cord cannot reduce the number of botch
dice to zero).

**The Silver Cord:** You can apply your silver cord score as a bonus to
all rolls that involve Personality Traits, and to rolls to protect you
from natural or supernatural mental influence, such as a spell,
intimidation, or verbal trickery. In addition, if your mind is ever
overcome by another force your familiar may be able to free you. To be
successful, it must roll 9+ on a stress die with the silver cord score
as its bonus (one attempt per day). If the roll botches, the animal\'s
mind is overcome along with yours.

**The Bronze Cord:** You can apply your bronze cord score as a bonus to
Soak rolls and totals, to healing rolls, to rolls to withstand
deprivation (such as to holding your breath or resisting sleepiness),
and to rolls to resist aging. It does not help you withstand Fatigue.

The magus binds a familiar by forging the cords, so both the initial
bond and the forging of the cords take place in the same season.

The magus may choose to strengthen the bonds after binding the familiar.
He must use the same Arts as for the initial binding, and may buy bond
strengths with the new value of the Lab Total. This strengthening also
takes a single season, and costs a number of pawns of vis equal to one
fifth of the magus\'s Lab Total, rounded up, minus the number of pawns
of vis already spent on binding the familiar. This does not include
pawns of vis spent on empowering the bond (see below). Thus, the number
of pawns of vis that must be spent to get cords of a certain strength
remains the same whether the magus does it all at once, or over several
seasons.

The Bound Familiar

The familiar binding gives both the magus and the familiar the Minor
Virtue True Friend, relating to the other half of the partnership. Thus,
they also gain Personality Traits of Loyal (partner) +3.

The familiar will not die of old age as long as the magus is alive, and
it only suffers ill effects from aging when the magus does. If it did
not previously have human intelligence, it gains it, with a score of
--3. It gains a score equal to the magus in any languages that the magus
speaks; any familiar can understand and read the languages understood by
its master, and can speak them if it has the relevant vocal equipment.
Familiars can learn Abilities in the same way as humans. They cannot,
however, learn magic, although they can learn Magic Theory and serve as
laboratory assistants, even though they do not have The Gift.

The magus and the familiar are magically linked. Each serves as an
Arcane Connection to the other. Neither needs to overcome the other\'s
Magic Resistance in order to affect them with a spell or magical
ability.

The familiar uses the better of its Magic Resistance or the magus\'s
Form resistance to resist spells, but this resistance does not stack
with a Parma Magica. The magus may choose to use the familiar\'s Magic
Resistance, but this does not stack with a Parma Magica.

Both the familiar and the magus retain any abilities that they had
before the ritual was performed.

Empowering the Bond

A maga may, at any time, invest powers in the familiar bond. This is a
laboratory activity, and the rules are the same as those for investing a
power in an invested device, with five exceptions.

First, there is no limit to the number of powers which may be invested
in a familiar.

Second, the maga gets no bonus to the Lab Total from other effects
already invested in the familiar. Instead, she gets +5 if the effect
matches either the Technique or Form used to bind the familiar, and +10
if it matches both.

Third, the maga may invest any number of powers in a season, if they are
all of the same Technique and Form and their levels add to less than or
equal to half her Lab Total.

Fourth, powers are limited to effects which target the maga, the
familiar, or both.

Finally, the benefits of Verditius Mysteries do not add to the Lab
Total. The Mystery has nothing to do with familiars.

If the enchantment affects only the maga, it is activated by and under
the control of the familiar. If it affects only the familiar, it is
activated by and under the control of the maga. For the use of effects
enchanted into the familiar bond, the maga and familiar are always
considered to be touching one another.

Foci that cover the familiar apply to the investment of all powers, no
matter what they do. Foci that cover the power apply as normal.

Every time the magus invests a power in the bond both the magus and the
familiar take on some minor characteristic of the other. This is a
purely cosmetic effect, but should be stronger the more powerful the
effect.

While this process does produce a Laboratory Text, that text only
applies to investing the power into the bond of this magus and familiar,
and thus is rarely of any use to anyone, including the magus who creates
it.

Investing a power into the bond costs the same as investing a power into
an enchanted device: one pawn of vis for every ten levels, or fraction,
of the modified effect. This vis must match the Technique or Form of the
effect.

One very important benefit of enchanting a power into the familiar bond
is that the power does not cause Warping (page @@) as a constant
mystical effect.

Example Powers

**Speech:** Giving an animal the ability to form human speech is Muto
Animal, with a base level of 5 (a minor change that makes the animal
unnatural). The duration needs to be Concentration, with the bond
maintaining concentration, and the range needs to be increased to Touch.
This gives level 20. The maga needs to maintain the ability at sunrise
and sunset, but can reactivate it once per day if she \'forgets\'.

**Mental communication:** Two effects, each allowing one partner to
communicate with the other. The effect is Creo Mentem, as one partner is
creating things in the mind of the other. If only words can be
transmitted, the base level is 3, plus one magnitude for Touch range,
plus ten levels for unlimited use, which is 14. If more complex
thoughts, such as images and emotions, can be transmitted, then the base
level is four, plus one magnitude for Touch range, plus ten for
unlimited use, for a final level of 15.

**Shapechanging:** The most efficient way to get controllable changes is
to set the duration of the spell to Concentration, and then enhance the
effect so that the bond maintains concentration. To change the familiar
into a human, the effect is Muto Animal with a Corpus requisite, and the
base level is 10. Add one magnitude each for Touch range and
Concentration duration, and five levels for the item to maintain
Concentration. The final level is 25, if the transformation can be done
once per day. The level required to transform the maga into the form of
her familiar varies. Both can also take on other forms, if the
appropriate powers are invested.

**Shared Senses:** Looking through the other's eyes or hearing through
their ears is an Intellego Mentem effect. The base level to share a
single sense is five (by analogy from the guidelines), plus five for
Touch range and five for Concentration duration. Another five levels
lets the bond maintain the effect, for a total level of 20 if the sense
can be shared once per day. Note that this sharing works only in one
direction; a second power must be instilled for mutual sharing to be
possible.

**Location:** The base level to find the partner is 3, which needs to be
increased by one magnitude, to 4, for Touch range. This is Intellego
Corpus to find the maga, and Intellego Animal to find the familiar.

**Aura of Fire:** Wreath the maga or familiar in flames, which do not
burn her but do burn anything that comes within them. This is creating
flame in an unnatural shape, so the fire does damage equal to its level.
The Arts are Creo Ignem, with a Rego requisite. +5 levels to raise the
duration to Diameter, +5 levels for range Touch, +5 for the Rego
requisite, and +10 for unlimited uses. Final level is damage + 25.

**Razor-sharp steel claws:** The Arts are Muto Animal (for the familiar)
or Muto Corpus (for the maga), with a Terram requisite. The Muto Animal
base level would be 3, and the Muto Corpus would be 2 or 3, so the base
level is 5, to create base metal. Add five levels for range Touch, and
ten total for Concentration duration and concentration maintained by the
bond. Because the claws are supposed to be magically sharp, the level is
raised by five. Add ten levels so that the effect can be invoked at
will, for a final level of 35.

The Familiar in Play

You and your familiar will undoubtedly grow closer as the saga
progresses, learning from each other and strengthening your common bond.
Over the years, your familiar learns what you know, provided that you
keep the familiar with you when you study and that you share your
knowledge with it.

Your familiar ages along with you, generally dying a few days before or
several weeks after you. The sudden death of your familiar is a warning
of immediate danger. Should you ever die while your familiar remains
alive, your familiar will experience a shock that may kill it, and even
if it lives, it is reduced to a pathetic, devastated condition ever
after. Likewise, if you survive your familiar, you may feel a profound
emptiness in your life that lasts for months, or even years. Having a
familiar is a personal, private thing, so only those more concerned with
status than true companionship use their familiars as status symbols.
You should hold the same level of protectiveness for your familiar that
you would for a spouse.

You can only have one familiar at a time. Your familiar will be with you
for a long time, so make it interesting.

The Participation of Other Players

The storyguide plays an important role in the creation of your familiar.
If your troupe has someone who acts as storyguide for laboratory
activities, that person may act as storyguide while you are creating
your familiar. However, you may wish to use the whole troupe as the
acting storyguide during this process, both to get more creative input
and to make the familiar more acceptable to your fellow players, who may
find it a challenge to deal with such a strange addition to the company.

Because you and your familiar are so close, you may roleplay your
familiar as an extension of your character. After all, you may have
similar abilities and personality quirks. However, you may also have
another player act as your familiar. This alternative assures that your
familiar is at least distinct from you, and is advised if you and your
familiar don\'t get along very well.

Apprentices

In your pursuit of the art of magic, you are likely to want an
apprentice. Though the Code of Hermes requires that you devote a season
a year to teaching your apprentice rather than doing research, the
apprentice in turn is required to help you do your lab work. In
addition, an apprentice provides you close human companionship and the
chance to leave a living legacy when you die. Your apprentice will
likely be the closest thing to a son or daughter that you, as a magus,
will ever have.

Finding Your Apprentice

Among the common people there sometimes appear rare individuals with The
Gift --- those who have innate magical power. Only these individuals can
become apprentices and eventually magi. Luckily for those magi who seek
them, these people inevitably stand out from the crowd. Most potential
apprentices somehow attract supernatural attention to themselves. In
many populations there is a youth who is prone to wandering alone at
night, who is the subject of much town gossip, and who displays a
precocious wit. Chances are that such a person is a potential
apprentice.

Searching for an apprentice can lead to good storytelling and
roleplaying possibilities, especially if the search is complicated by
enemy forces or uncooperative members of the child\'s family. However,
if you do not wish to make a story out of finding an apprentice, you may
determine the results of the search with a die roll. For every season
you spend searching for a potential apprentice, make a stress die and
add your Perception. If the result is 9+, you find one. If you botch,
you may think you\'ve found a child fit to be an apprentice but are
somehow duped, either by the child or by some power that replaces your
child with its servant.

Your student should normally be at least seven years old, as younger
children rarely have the ability to start Hermetic training. It is rare
for Hermetic apprentices to be older than twenty when they are taken,
but it does happen. Most Gifted people have learned other supernatural
abilities by that age, making it difficult to train them (see page @@,
below).

Being taken away by a magus to parts unknown is normally disturbing and
frightening to a new apprentice, even to one excited or relieved to be
free of a miserable living situation. Some children chosen for
apprenticeship are kidnapped by their masters, some are coaxed away with
promises of knowledge and power, while others are actually offered (or
sold) to magi by families who cannot handle the youngsters\' strange
ways. Though most children chosen to be apprentices come willingly and
freely, the Code of Hermes does not require that they do. Strictly
speaking, magi are allowed to obtain apprentices in whatever manner they
wish.

Training Your Apprentice

Once you have your apprentice, the training begins. The Peripheral Code
contains a substantial number of rulings on the relationship between a
magus and his apprentice. A magus claims an apprentice from the
beginning of the season in which he opens the Arts. A magus must
personally teach the apprentice for at least one season per year over
the course of the apprenticeship, and the season spent opening the Arts
counts as the first of these seasons.

A member of House Bonisagus may claim another magus\'s apprentice at any
time, but other members of the Order may not interfere between a master
and his apprentice. The apprentice belongs to the master, and may not
choose to go to another magus unless his current master fails to give
him enough teaching. Harming the apprentice is regarded as a serious
attack on the master, and can be punished. Masters who abuse their
apprentices are not well-regarded, but it is not against the Code to do
so.

A magus may choose to pass an apprentice on to a second magus, provided
that both magi agree to the transfer. The apprentice\'s consent is not
required.

Use the rules in the Experience and Advancement section of the Long Term
Events chapter to train your apprentice, remembering that you must spend
at least one season a year directly teaching. Keep in mind that you
should try to impart a broad base of skills --- refer to the guidelines
in the Character Creation chapter (page @@) to give you an idea of what
level of apprentice competence you should be shooting for.

Since an apprentice without a Parma Magica would normally suffer a --3
penalty to all totals due to the effect of The Gift, the Order has ruled
that failing to extend your Parma Magica to cover your apprentice during
training is a violation of the requirement to train your apprentice
properly. If your score in Parma Magica is three or less, it does not
give you any bonus to Magic Resistance while shared, but it still
deadens the effect of The Gift.

It is a good idea to have someone else teach the apprentice Latin, and
possibly Magic Theory, before you start the apprenticeship, as this
makes your apprentice more useful to you. However, until you open the
character\'s Arts he is not your apprentice, and may choose to attach
himself to another magus, or may be taken by another magus. Stealing
potential apprentices who are obviously intended for magical training is
frowned upon, and may be punished, but rescuing Gifted people who are
simply being exploited as lab assistants is well-regarded. Indeed, a
magus keeping a Gifted character as a simple lab assistant is normally
required by a Tribunal to either start training him or to pass him on to
a magus who is willing to do so.

While the magus must personally provide the minimum one season per year,
he may have others teach the apprentice in other seasons, or allow the
apprentice to study from books. Most magi do allow their apprentices
some extra study, as it is rare for a magus to spend fifteen years
without studying the Arts from a book, and apprentices are no help with
those activities.

Opening the Arts

One of your seasons of teaching must be spent training the apprentice in
the basics of Hermetic magic, and you can teach nothing else in that
season. Thus, in this season the apprentice gains a score of 0 in all
fifteen Hermetic Arts, but learns nothing else. This is referred to as
\'opening the Arts\'.

If you have a score of less than five in any Art when you open them,
your apprentice automatically has a Deficiency (see pages @@ and @@) in
that Art. Giving an apprentice Deficiencies in this way is normally
treated as a Low Crime by the Tribunals of the Order, and attracts a
great deal of social stigma. As a result, few magi train an apprentice
until they have a score of five or higher in all Arts. (Note that this
is far from the only way that an apprentice can gain a Deficiency, and
most of the other ways are not under the master\'s control, and thus not
Low Crimes.) You may teach Magic Theory before opening the Arts, but you
may not teach Arts or spells.

If your apprentice already has some non-Hermetic Supernatural Ability,
you can only open the Arts if your Intellego Vim Lab Total equals or
exceeds five times the apprentice\'s score in the relevant Ability, and
is at least 10 if the Ability normally derives from a Minor Virtue, or
at least 30 if it normally derives from a Major Virtue. For supernatural
powers without a linked Ability, you need a Lab Total of 10 for Minor
Virtues and 30 for Major ones. If the apprentice has multiple
Supernatural Abilities, add all the levels together to determine whether
you can open the Arts.

If your Intellego Vim Lab Total merely equals or exceeds the level, the
Supernatural Abilities are lost. If your Lab Total is at least double
the required level, you may either preserve the Ability, or convert it
into a Hermetic Virtue. The choice is the parens' decision. The Virtue
should be a Major Virtue if the original Ability was, and Minor
likewise. If converted, Supernatural Abilities must normally change into
Hermetic Virtues that the parens possesses. This is similar to teaching
the apprentice Hermetic Virtues (see later); only Hermetic Virtues
possessed by the magus can be passed on, either through teaching or
converting. While the parens need not know how to perform the
Supernatural Ability, he must know how to perform the Hermetic Virtue.
Alternatively, the parens may convert a Supernatural Virtue into a
Hermetic Virtue he does not know, if the two Virtues are very similar.
For example, Skinchanger might convert into a Minor Magical Focus with
self-transformation or with the type of animal the apprentice could
change into, or Magic Sensitivity into an Affinity with Intellego or
Vim. In this case, the Supernatural Virtue was a feature of the child\'s
Gift, and the parens merely turns that feature into a new, Hermetic
channel. Neither the parens nor the child knows what this channel is,
and the child is likely to believe that the ability has been simply
lost. The troupe should decide whether two Virtues are sufficiently
similar. If the apprentice has multiple Supernatural Abilities, you may
save some and lose others, but you cannot open the Arts unless your
Intellego Vim Lab Total exceeds the level determined by all the
Abilities.

Once the Arts are Opened, the apprentice character has a 0 in each of
the five Techniques and ten Forms. She can immediately cast spontaneous
spells. She can read any casting tablets the covenant may have,
providing she has a score of 1 in Artes Liberales and 4 in Latin.
Barring some logical limitations --- the apprentice can\'t cast
formulaic spells because she doesn\'t know any --- an apprentice can
undertake any magical activity a magus can. Simply use the applicable
formula based on the current Arts scores of the apprentice for any
magical activity she undertakes.

Teaching Hermetic Virtues

Teaching a Hermetic Virtue combines aspects of learning a Supernatural
Ability (page @@) with learning a Mystery Cult Virtue (page @@). The
instructor, typically an apprentice\'s parens, generates a Teaching
Source Quality total that is compared to a required target level. Both
teacher and student must be Gifted individuals trained in Hermetic Magic
Theory. A magus cannot teach a Gifted hedge wizard a Hermetic Virtue
because the two men do not understand magic in the same way. At the end
of a season\'s instruction, the parens generates a Teaching Source
Quality just as if he were teaching an Ability or an Art.

**Teaching Source Quality: Communication + Teaching + 3 + bonus**

The bonuses for the Instruction Total are the same bonuses that apply
for every teacher (page @@). Like Arts, Hermetic Virtues can only be
taught one-on-one, so every parens\' Teaching Source Quality receives a
+6 bonus. Virtues that affect teaching also apply.

An additional bonus can be included if the teacher includes a Hermetic
Flaw along with the Hermetic Virtue. Mystery Cult initiations sometimes
include Ordeals, which add a bonus to learning the Mystery Cult Virtue.
In its roughest sense, an Ordeal is a Flaw. For whatever reason ---
magic being quixotic at its core --- it is easier to teach a Hermetic
Virtue if one includes a Hermetic Flaw. Including a Minor Hermetic Flaw
adds a +3 bonus. Including a Major Hermetic Flaw adds a +9 bonus. A
teacher can only include a Hermetic Flaw that he has.

Like Mystery Initiations and regular teaching, there is no die roll. The
Hermetic Virtue is taught in a single season if the Teaching Source
Quality meets or exceeds the Target Level.

**The Target Level is 15 to teach a Minor Hermetic Virtue**

**The Target Level is 21 to teach a Major Hermetic Virtue**

The more Hermetic Virtues a Gifted student has, the harder it is to
teach him new Hermetic Virtues. Learning Supernatural Abilities is also
hindered by knowledge possessed in other Supernatural Abilities, and
Hermetic theorists speculate that whatever nuance of The Gift so limits
learning Supernatural Abilities also limits learning Hermetic Virtues
through instruction. Each Minor Hermetic Virtue the character already
possesses adds +3 to the Target Level, and each Major Hermetic Virtue
adds +9.

A teacher can only teach a Hermetic Virtue that he has. If he decides to
include a Hermetic Flaw in the instruction, to make the process easier,
he can only include a Hermetic Flaw that he possesses. The student
cannot instruct himself, another difference between learning Hermetic
Virtues and Mystery Cult Virtues. Not every magus teaches Hermetic
Virtues to his apprentice, although doing so does fulfill the annual
requirement of one season of personal instruction due the apprentice. If
a magus would rather teach Hermetic Virtues than Arts or Abilities, the
apprentice may end up with less knowledge (fewer experience points) than
his peers. Like most of apprenticeship, it is the parens\' decision. It
isn\'t unusual for a parens to teach Arts, Abilities, and spells during
the required seasons of instruction, and spend additional seasons
teaching the apprentice a Hermetic Virtue or two.

Training is not the only source of Hermetic Virtues; some Gifted
individuals have Gifts that are naturally apt for certain areas of
Hermetic magic. In game terms, they take the Hermetic Virtue before
training.

Acquiring House Virtues

Every Hermetic House has one or more Virtues associated with it, and
every Hermetic magus receives a free Minor Virtue based on his House.
Players often refer to this Virtue as the \"House Virtue,\" because it
comes free with the character\'s Hermetic House. The House Virtue does
not have to be specifically taught, although it can be. Often it is
learned over time, assumed by the impressionable young apprentice as she
learns magic during the prolonged teaching and laboratory interactions
with her parens.

For over half of the Houses, it takes 10 seasons of one-to-one
interactions with a parens for an apprentice to gain the free Minor
House Virtue. Teaching Arts, Arcane Abilities, and spells and helping in
the laboratory all count as seasons of one-to-one interactions. If an
apprentice does not receive 10 seasons of one-to-one interaction, he
does not receive the free House Virtue. In such a case, there would
likely be other problems due to legal issues.

**Acquiring the Minor Hermetic House Virtue requires 10 Seasons of
one-to-one Interaction with Parens**

This rule pertains to seven of the twelve Houses: all four True
Lineages, and three of the Societates. The fourth Societas, House Ex
Miscellanea, is a special case because an apprentice of a House Ex
Miscellanea magus receives a package of House Virtues and Flaws: one
Minor Hermetic Virtue, one Major non-Hermetic Virtue, and one Major
Hermetic Flaw. Because there are several types of Ex Miscellanea magi,
the troupe should decide if an apprentice of a specific tradition learns
the House Virtues and Flaws through one-on-one association or through a
process similar to a Mystery Initiation like the Mystery Cult Houses.

An apprentice of a magus of a Mystery Cult gains the free House Virtue
by undergoing an Initiation to learn the House\'s Outer Mystery. House
Verditius Initiates an apprentice immediately following the opening of
an apprentice\'s Arts. House Bjornaer Initiates an apprentice\'s
Heartbeast at some point during apprenticeship, at the Ritual of Twelve
Years (see *Houses of Hermes: Mystery Cults*, page 16). Houses Criamon
and Merinita Initiate apprentices at various times, usually dependent on
the master. Initiation into a House\'s Outer Mystery takes a season.

The apprentice must learn the same free House Virtue that his parens
knows. In a House where there is a choice of House Virtues, the parens
can decide which House Virtue is acquired, if he has both. House
Flambeau, for example, has the choice of Puissant Perdo or Puissant
Ignem. If the master has both Virtues, he can choose either as the
apprentice\'s House Virtue.

Gaining Hermetic Flaws

Few apprentices purposefully gain Hermetic Flaws. A player can always
select a Hermetic Flaw at character generation, and while this will
develop sometime during the child character\'s life, that is different
from gaining a Hermetic Flaw after creating the character. Hermetic
Flaws acquired after character generation affect a character as soon as
they are gained, their effects manifesting immediately. Hermetic magi
have not found a way to remove Hermetic Flaws, and once gained a
Hermetic Flaw is permanent, barring a story.

The two most common ways characters gain Hermetic Flaws are through
learning Hermetic Virtues, and as a consequence of game play. As
mentioned previously, it is easier to learn a Hermetic Virtue from a
teacher if that teacher includes a Hermetic Flaw in the process.
Hermetic magi do not fully understand why this is so, but like Mystery
Cult Initiations, tainting the learning process with an incurred
liability makes instruction easier. The second way characters gain
Hermetic Flaws is through play. Uncontrolled Temporary Twilight episodes
are a frequent cause, bestowing Hermetic Flaws on an apprentice in the
same way they grant Hermetic Flaws to a magus (**ArM5**, page 89).
Gaining a Hermetic Deficiency Flaw during the opening of the Arts is
another path to receiving a new Flaw during play. Some Supernatural
creatures have the power to grant Minor and Major Flaws, and while these
aren\'t always Hermetic, they can be. These Flaws are not necessarily
permanent and many are temporary inconveniences. *Realms of Power:
Magic* and *Realms of Power: Faerie* have details and example creatures.

Fleshing Out Your Apprentice

The basic benefit that an apprentice provides you is the addition of his
Intelligence and Magic Theory scores to your Lab Totals (see page @@).
If all you want is a lab assistant, you only need to keep track of your
apprentice\'s Intelligence and Magic Theory scores, and after fifteen
years, your apprentice becomes a full magus and leaves your service.

However, if created as a full character, an apprentice can be developed
as the saga progresses into both a very important companion to your
magus and a valuable member of the covenant. To create your apprentice
as a character, determine Characteristics, Virtues and Flaws, and
Abilities for a character of young age. Make sure that the character has
The Gift, otherwise he cannot be taught Hermetic magic, and consider
carefully whether to take any other supernatural abilities. Make sure
that your magus can open the apprentice\'s Arts. Choose Abilities that
the character learned in his childhood. As the saga progresses, update
the apprentice\'s Abilities, magical Arts, spells known, and other
statistics as you train him, just as you would those of any other
character.

The Apprentice in Play

A fully developed apprentice makes a playable character. If you want to
play an apprentice, keep in mind that you have no natural niche in the
story. Grogs fight, companions provide skilled assistance, and magi have
powerful spells. As an apprentice you are outclassed in all areas.
Nevertheless, some stories are made exciting by an apprentice character
or characters, as apprentices are interesting individuals, especially if
there\'s no magus around to overshadow the apprentice\'s magic with his
own. The *Apprentices* sourcebook covers these sorts of stories in much
more detail, and gives more information on child characters.

When you are a magus and teacher, some of the best roleplaying
opportunities for your apprentice arise when he is interacting with you.
To encourage this, you may want to let another player roleplay your
apprentice, or you may consider your apprentice a troupe character to be
played by different members of the troupe at different times, much as a
grog is (see Troupe Style Play on page @@).

The End of Apprenticeship

Apprenticeship ends with the \'apprentice\'s gauntlet\', which is
normally administered after fifteen years. This is set by the parens,
and is intended to demonstrate that the apprentice is worthy to become a
full magus. If the apprentice fails the gauntlet, he remains an
apprentice, traditionally for another year.

If an apprentice fails three gauntlets, the Quaesitores set the fourth
and subsequent gauntlets, to ensure that the parens is not setting
impossible gauntlets simply to retain the apprentice\'s services. An
apprentice who fails Quaesitorial gauntlets repeatedly will carry a
reputation for incompetence with him if he ever does pass, but there is
no other consequence. The Quaesitores do tend to set easier gauntlets
than most parentes, testing basic competence only, so even those
apprentices trained by Incomprehensible masters can normally pass.

Arcane Experimentation

The preceding rules assume that you are being careful with your
laboratory work and staying safely within the bounds of what you know
how to do. If you wish, however, you can test your limits and experiment
with new and possibly dangerous techniques. You can experiment when
inventing a spell, creating any magical enchantment (device or
familiar), or investigating an enchantment. In any case, you have the
chance to perform feats that are normally beyond your capabilities, but
you also run the risk of failing utterly, perhaps dangerously.

The Experimental Premise

At the beginning of each season, consider the project you\'re working on
and decide whether you want to experiment on it. If you want to work
from and benefit from a Laboratory Text, you cannot experiment, because
you must follow the Laboratory Text precisely. If you do experiment, add
a simple die roll to your Lab Total. This bonus represents the fruits of
the risks you take. However, you must also roll a stress die on the
\"Extraordinary Results Chart\" for each season that the project
involves. If you experiment over multiple seasons, inventing the same
spell or instilling the same power in a device, the chart results for
each season accumulate and apply to the whole project. For example, if
it takes two seasons to invest a power into your staff, you have to make
a roll on the chart each season. Both results affect the staff or the
power you\'re investing into it.

Exceptional Risk

You may choose to push your limits even further, adding from +1 to +3
(your choice) to the die roll; this bonus is called your risk modifier.
When you do this, you must add the risk modifier to all your rolls on
the \"Extraordinary Results Chart,\" and you get a number of extra botch
dice on your rolls equal to your bonus.

Extraordinary Results

Some of the results listed on the \"Extraordinary Result Chart\" require
some interpretation. When interpreting these results, consider the
magus\'s sigil, specialties, and weaknesses. Also take into account the
type of spell or power being worked on, and the Laws of Magic. The more
aspects of magic that you bring together, the more interesting the
result is. The level of the effect is not changed by any extraordinary
result, nor does it gain any requisites. This may result in a spell or
effect that is more or less powerful than a conventional Hermetic effect
of its level.

When referring to the \"Extraordinary Results Chart,\" roll a stress
die, adding your risk modifier (if any). If you roll a 0, roll one botch
die, plus a number of botch dice equal to your risk modifier. You also
get one additional botch die for each point in the supernatural aura of
the laboratory, even it would not normally grant you extra botch dice
(such as a Magic aura for magi).

If your creation comes out flawed or difficult to use because of your
roll on the \"Extraordinary Results Chart,\" you have two choices: live
with the anomaly, or recreate the effect. If you recreate it, use the
normal laboratory rules. However, you gain your Magic Theory score (your
score at the time of your experiment) as a bonus to your Lab Total to
accomplish the invention, having learned something from your nearly
successful experiment. Thus, your Magic Theory score is applied twice to
your Lab Total. The recreation process must occur in another season, and
you need not experiment then. While this may often be a good option for
spells, the additional costs for enchanted items make it less appealing
there, and magi are more likely to choose to live with flaws, even quite
serious ones.

Inventing a Spell by Experimentation

Points from the simple die, added to your Lab Total, might let you
finish a spell sooner, or even invent a spell that is otherwise beyond
your capacity. If even with the added simple die your Lab Total is still
lower than the spell\'s level, you cannot invent the spell, and must
still make a roll on the \"Extraordinary Results Chart.\" Even though
your experiment fails, it can still blow up in your face. Having failed
to invent the spell, you may try again next season, and may experiment
again. You do not gain your Magic Theory score as a bonus, however, as
you did not nearly succeed.

Enchanted Items Created by Experimentation

Even with the added bonus of a simple die, your Lab Total may not meet
the level of the effect you\'re investing. In that case, you lose all
the vis involved and must still roll on the \"Extraordinary Effects
Chart.\" You may try again next season, though, and may experiment
again.

If your Lab Total is high enough to invest an effect, but the effect
turns out to be flawed (as determined by a roll on the chart), it still
\"takes up space\" in your device, just like a normal effect. Thus, if
you risk experimentation and make a mistake, you can permanently limit
the effectiveness of your magical item.

Enchanting a Familiar by Experimentation

A magus would have to be insane to enchant his familiar by
experimentation, as a mistake in any season of binding or instilling
powers could taint the deepest bond he has. Still, some magi are insane.
Experimenting on this activity adds to the Lab Total as normal.

Experimenting on Longevity Rituals

You may experiment on Longevity Rituals, adding the simple die to your
Lab Total. This bonus increases the potency of your ritual, giving you
greater resilience against the effects of aging. If your ritual is
flawed by a roll on the \"Extraordinary Results Chart,\" you may create
a second ritual, which over-rides the effects of the flawed ritual, but
this takes an additional season.

Investigating an Enchanted Item by Experimentation

The simple die is added to every roll made to discover an item\'s
invested powers. If you cannot bring your Lab Total high enough to
discover an item\'s powers, you still have to roll on the
\"Extraordinary Results Chart,\" though.

When investigating an enchanted item by experimenting on it, you take
risks not normally taken, and may damage or destroy the magic item in
the process. Any results from the chart indicating damage or changes to
the project you are working on are applied to the magic item or one of
its powers. It\'s possible, though, that a magic item\'s own protections
can preserve it from the dangers of your experiments. If the level of an
item\'s protecting power (like Magic Resistance or an appropriate spell)
exceeds your Lab Total (including any bonus for experimentation), the
item resists any damaging effects rolled on the chart.

Extraordinary Results Chart

Roll Result

Botch Disaster

0--4 No extraordinary effects

5--6 Side effect

7 No benefit

8 Complete failure

9 Special or story event

10 Discovery

11 Modified effect

12+ Roll twice more on this chart.

**Disaster:** You fail miserably. Consult the following table for the
result, depending on the number of zeroes rolled on the botch dice.
Suffer the effect for the number you roll and for all lower numbers,
unless explicitly told otherwise. For example, an explosion (3) also
destroys the creation and inflicts Warping Points on the magus.

Zeroes Result

1 Everyone in the lab gains Warping Points equal to the number of zeroes
on the botch roll. Hermetic magi (and anyone else opened to the Hermetic
Arts) must roll for Twilight if they gain two or more; members of other
traditions may also suffer serious effects, as determined by their
tradition. The season is completely wasted; see Complete Failure. If
there are other results and magi choose not to resist Twilight, they
enter Twilight before the effects occur, and thus avoid any personal
damage.

2 Your creation is destroyed. If it is a single-season project, this is
the same as a Complete Failure.

3 Your laboratory gains the Damaged Flaw.

4 Explosion! Your laboratory gains the Wrecked Flaw (instead of the
Damaged Flaw), and anyone in the laboratory takes two Heavy Wounds.

5+ The storyguide picks one of the following.

A story event threatens the whole covenant. This may arise immediately
from the explosion (a mundane fire, for example), or may be a lingering
after-effect of the uncontrolled magic, causing a story some time later.

The explosion completely destroys the laboratory. The structure gains
the Deformed and Unstable Flaws, and the whole laboratory must be
rebuilt from nothing, rather than gaining the Wrecked Flaw. Anyone in
the laboratory takes an additional Incapacitating Wound.

**No Extraordinary Effects:** Your experiment works without producing
any unintended effects.

**Side Effect:** Your magical creation acquires a side effect. Roll a
simple die, and work out the specifics with the storyguide.

Roll Result

1 Your sigil is exaggerated to many times its normal strength, becoming
a significant portion of the effect.

2--3 The effect has a minor flaw. For example, a spell that allows you
to communicate with animals causes you to retain some of the animal\'s
speech patterns for a time after the spell ends.

4--5 The spell has a minor side effect. For example, a spell that
controls an animal causes grass to grow under its feet.

6 The spell has a minor side benefit. For example, a wind spell has a
pleasant smell and makes flying insects uncomfortable.

7 The spell has a major flaw. For example, a healing spell causes its
targets great pain.

8 The spell has a major side effect. For example, a plant control spell
attracts all birds in 100 paces.

9 The spell has a major side benefit. For example, a spell that
transforms you into a wolf also lets you speak to all beasts while a
wolf.

10 The spell has a fatal flaw. For example, an invisibility spell makes
you glow.

**No Benefit:** Your experimentation produces no results. You lose the
benefit of the extra die and risk modifier --- recalculate your Lab
Total without those modifiers. If your new Lab Total is too low to
succeed in the project, it must be abandoned.

**Complete Failure:** You get nothing from your efforts, and your season
is wasted. If you were working on a familiar or enchanted item, roll a
simple die. On a 0, it is destroyed.

**Special or Story Event:** The storyguide picks one of the following.

The creation requires additional raw vis. The magus must spend a number
of additional pawns of vis that match the Technique or Form of the
project equal to the magnitude of the effect (including modifications)
plus the risk modifier. If he is unable to do so, either because he does
not have the vis, or because he cannot handle enough vis in a single
season, treat as a Complete Failure.

The magus also creates a spell, with the same Technique and Form as the
project, of any level that he could create in a single season. The spell
is designed by the storyguide or troupe, and need not have an obvious
connection to the project. The magus knows it, and can write up the
Laboratory Text as normal, allowing other magi to create it as well. It
is simpler if this spell does follow all the rules of Hermetic Magic,
but that is not essential if the troupe is happy with the complications.
Treat this as No Extraordinary Effects for the main project.

The creation is modified in some way that does not necessarily fall
under the categories of Side Effect or Modified Effect, although it may
if desired. This allows the storyguide to introduce any sort of
supernatural effect --- the creation could even be strongly affected by
a different realm. The result may be positive or negative from the
magus\'s perspective, but should be interesting for the troupe.

A story event happens. This can be anything; it could be used as an
opportunity to introduce a major plot line, or as a brief and amusing
distraction. It does not need to happen immediately; the uncontrolled
magic might set something in motion, or it might be a result of using
the creation in a particular context, some time later. The story event
may be basically positive --- the magus might attract the attention of a
potential familiar, for example. Unless the story event requires
otherwise, treat this as No Extraordinary Effects for the project
itself.

**Discovery:** Roll a simple die and add your risk modifier. If you are
engaged in Arcane Discovery (see page @@), you make a discovery that
advances your project, and ignore this table.

Roll Result

1--4 You gain 15 experience points in Magic Theory.

5--6 You gain 15 experience points in some Ability related to the
experiment.

7--8 You gain three experience points in one of the Arts used in the
experiment.

9 You gain enough experience points to bring one of the Arts used in the
experiment to the next level (or three experience points, whichever is
greater).

10+ Roll twice, and reroll this result if it is generated again.

**Modified Effect:** Roll a simple die and add your risk modifier. If
you were investigating a magic item, you have changed one or more of its
powers.

Roll Result

1--3 The spell or effect is reduced in range, duration, target, or
potency.

4--6 The spell or effect\'s range, duration, target, or potency is
increased.

7--8 The use of the spell or effect is restricted. For example, it fails
to work in certain circumstances, like when it is raining.

9--10 The actual effect of your experiment is modified. For example, a
spell like *Curse of Circe* (page @@) turns the target into a goat
instead of a pig.

11+ The actual effect of your experiment is changed completely, save
that the relevant Technique and Form remain unchanged, and the level
remains similar.

Arcane Discovery

Hermetic magi can expand the possibilities of Hermetic magic through
their own discoveries. It did not spring, perfect, from the brow of
Bonisagus, and it has been developed and expanded since. The most famous
examples are probably the development of the *Aegis of the Hearth* by
Notatus of Bonisagus, the first Primus of that House, and the expansion
of Vim magic to the Divine, Infernal, and Faerie realms by Conciatta of
Bonisagus in the tenth century. (For more details on Conciatta, see
*Legends of Hermes.*) Player characters may also attempt to expand
Hermetic magic in this way, and while the immediate benefits of power
are less than those of other laboratory projects, the gain in prestige
may be far greater.

The Breakthrough

To achieve an arcane discovery, you must accumulate a number of
**breakthrough points** determined by the type of Breakthrough your
magus is attempting. There are three kinds of Breakthrough: **Minor**,
**Major** and **Hermetic**. Note that it is recommended that the exact
number of breakthrough points required may be varied, so the players do
not know the precise number needed for the Breakthrough.

A **Minor Breakthrough** is a development that is immediately useful and
applicable in the existing framework of Hermetic magic, such as a new
Range, Target or Duration. It improves or adds upon existing theory
without truly reaching the limits of magic. A Minor Breakthrough
typically requires around 30 breakthrough points. In many sagas, Minor
Breakthroughs happen easily enough that a maga can expect to achieve
this goal once or twice during her lifetime. Minor Breakthroughs could
be more common, but are few because most magi Bonisagi have loftier
goals. Why invent a new Range when you can attempt to break a Hermetic
Limit? Grandiosity usually propels magi toward harder projects.

A **Major Breakthrough** pushes those limits, but does not break them;
these include Hermetic Virtues for Gifted characters. Incorporating
hedge magic into Hermetic theory is a Major Breakthrough, and the
incorporation can then be taught to others as Supernatural Virtues. A
Major Breakthrough typically requires around 45 breakthrough points.
Notatus' development of the *Aegis of the Hearth* was a Major
Breakthrough, a variable spell based on Bonisagus' Parma Magica. Major
Breakthroughs make a magus famous. With persistence, a troupe playing in
a fast saga could realistically see a player make a Major Breakthrough.

A **Hermetic Breakthrough** is research that breaks one of the Lesser
Limits of Magic, for example a new Arcane Ability or the ability to cast
permanent duration spells without vis. Hermetic Breakthroughs re-write
the theory books; the only Hermetic Breakthrough in 450 years was the
development of the Parma Magica by Bonisagus, which broke the Lesser
Limit of Magic Resistance, a limit that still binds all known forms of
non-Hermetic magic. A Hermetic Breakthrough typically requires around 60
breakthrough points.

A Breakthrough may be something entirely new, born from the imagination
of a creative maga. It may also be based on a form of non-Hermetic
magic, as a magus tries to make it possible for Hermetic magi to do
something that non-Hermetic wizards do. In either case, the researcher
may accumulate breakthrough points through experimentation, as described
later. In the latter case, the magus may also study the non-Hermetic
magic, seeking insights into its nature and applying them to Hermetic
magic. Both of these approaches yield breakthrough points, and points
from both sources may be mixed in a single project.

In either case, the troupe must define the result of the research in
advance and agree on the level of Breakthrough. Success will change the
saga, and so it is important that the whole troupe is happy with those
changes. *Ancient Magic* and *Hedge Magic Revised Edition* contain a
large number of suggested Breakthroughs that would allow a magus to
incorporate certain aspects of non-Hermetic magic into Hermetic theory.
These can also serve as inspiration for Breakthroughs that are not
linked to any existing tradition.

Experimentation

Once you have determined what sort of Breakthrough you would like to
accomplish, you must invent something Hermetically that somehow
incorporates your idea. This can be a spell or a magical enchantment,
either a lesser enchantment or a charged item. Detail the effect fully,
as per the normal rules. Since you are searching for clues aimed at
surpassing regular Hermetic theories, you must experiment, using the
rules found in the Arcane Experimentation section earlier, including
choosing a risk modifier for your experiment and rolling on the
Extraordinary Results Chart.

For your original research to be fruitful you must roll the Discovery
result on the Extraordinary Results Chart. Fortune plays a large roll in
the research process. However, you can hedge your bet with original
research in a way that you can not with regular experimentation. Instead
of adding your risk modifier into your Lab Total during the season, you
use that modifier to adjust your roll on the Extraordinary Results
Chart. The risk modifier still runs the range of +1 to +3, but you are
restricted in your choice by your Magic Theory score. For every five
points or fraction thereof of Magic Theory (including Puissant Magic
Theory) you may choose a risk modifier of 1. Thus, to chose a risk
modifier of +2 your Magic Theory must be 6 or higher, and a risk
modifier of +3 requires a Magic Theory of 11+.

**Risk Modifier: +1 per 5 points of Magic Theory or fraction thereof, up
to +3**

Consult the Extraordinary Results Chart as normal to determine the
effect on your spell, including adding your Risk Modifier. However, you
may also add or subtract all or part of your Risk Modifier in order to
get a Discovery in addition to the normal effect of experimentation.
Thus, if you had a Risk Modifier of +3, and rolled an 8, you would get a
Modified Effect (from a total of 11). You could also subtract 1 to get a
Discovery in addition. The effect of the spell is still modified. You
cannot use the Risk Modifier to get a supplementary result other than a
Discovery.

**Breakthrough: roll Discovery on the Extraordinary Results Chart during
a season of Arcane Experimentation**

**Risk Modifier: Do not add risk modifier into Lab Total. Add or
Subtract up to risk modifier again from the stress die rolled on the
Extraordinary Results Chart**

You are hoping for a Discovery. If you do not roll a Discovery, your
spell or item is still affected by the Extraordinary Results Chart. Most
likely you will end up with a slightly odd Hermetic effect. If your
original research involved a spell and that spell is flawed or difficult
to cast, you may reinvent the spell using the rules found in the Arcane
Experimentation section. If your research involved an item and that item
is flawed, you may attempt to reinvent that item, but all vis used in
the initial experiment is lost.

If your spell or enchanted item research takes more than a single season
to complete you must continue to roll on the Extraordinary Results Chart
for each season. Having deciding how you will use your Risk Modifier in
a previous season, you must continue to use it in the same manner for
consecutive seasons. If you subtracted 1 from your initial roll on the
Extraordinary Results Chart in your first season, for example, you must
subtract 1 from every additional roll on the Extraordinary Results Chart
in additional seasons until the item or spell is completed. You may
accrue odd and weird results as your research progresses, but may
continue to experiment providing you don't receive a Complete Failure or
Disaster result.

If you do achieve a Discovery during your experimentation then the
original research was a success. Ignore the Discovery sub-chart of the
Extraordinary Results Chart; that chart applies to those not
investigating the deeper mystery of Hermetic magic, instead discovering
something more intimate about their personal connection to magic and the
Arts. You, however, have found that elusive element of magic that you
started your original research searching for. Now you must stabilize
that experimental process to better understand your discovery.

Each spell or magical enchantment can only lead to one discovery. You
may repeatedly invent the same spell or enchantment experiment until a
discovery is rolled, even if the experiment was a success. Thus, you may
accumulate many usable versions of the same spell in process of your
research. However, once a specific experiment yields a Discovery, you
may no longer explore that spell or magical enchantment for further
discoveries.

Stabilizing The Unknown

After you have achieved your Discovery, you must stabilize that process
through exact repetition. You must repeat the experimentation,
continuing for the same number of seasons and using the exact Lab Total
and risk modifier that you used to find your Discovery. If you used vis
during your process you must repeat the amount used. You must roll again
on the Extraordinary Results Chart, and you must modify your roll in the
same direction as you did to make the Discovery. This means that if you
added your risk modifier to your roll your must add it again; if you
subtracted your risk modifier from your roll you must subtract it this
second time.

During the stabilization season you do not need to roll a Discovery to
succeed. As long as you do not roll a harmful effect (Disaster, No
Benefit, Complete Failure) you stabilize your discovery. Ignore any
beneficial result you might roll. If you do roll a harmful affect your
stabilization process fails, although you may try again in a subsequent
season.

If your stabilization season succeeds, you gain one breakthrough point
per magnitude of the invented Hermetic spell or enchanted item. You also
create a Laboratory Text that explains your discovery.

**Magnitudes of Stabilized Discovery equal Breakthrough Points**

As a side affect to this stabilization process, you receive Warping
Points from your attempts to understand this new magic. The number of
Warping Points gained is the magnitude of the effect minus a simple die.
If you gain 2 or more Warping Points you must roll to avoid Wizard's
Twilight (page @@). You can obviously mitigate the chance of gaining
Warping Points by experimenting with lower magnitude effects. However,
this lengthens your original research process, since it is your
accumulated effect magnitudes that ultimately add up to your
Breakthrough. Experimenting with higher magnitude spells hastens you
toward your Breakthrough and increases your risk of Wizard's Twilight.

**Warping Points gained: the magnitude of the Stabilized Discovery minus
a simple die**

You receive Warping Points whether you succeed or fail at stabilizing
your discovery. If your stabilization attempt fails, you may spend
another season and try it again. You may continue to stabilize your
discovery until you succeed, providing you spend consecutive seasons
until you succeed and you do not suffer some dire event along the way.

Integration

Insight can also be gained from studying some feature of a non-Hermetic
magical practice. Every insight the magus gains allows him to produce a
partially Hermetic effect incorporating some aspect of the magic in
question. As he produces more of these effects, he gains the broader
understanding necessary to incorporate that aspect into Hermetic theory
as a whole.

The seasons spent gaining insight produce Laboratory Texts. Any magus
may study these Laboratory Texts over the course of a season in order to
gain the same insight for himself, even without direct access to the
artifacts. Summaries of Laboratory Texts are not useful in this way,
however; only the whole thing can be used. For purposes of copying,
insight Laboratory Texts have a level equal to the typical number of
breakthrough points needed for the type of Breakthrough in question.

There are three sources of insight: **texts**, **relics** and
**teachers**.

**Texts** are books and tomes, symbolic wall paintings, or other
explanatory sources which describe how to learn, perform or cast a
magical effect. If the text contains the information needed to improve a
Supernatural Ability, a character who already had the Ability could use
it, as per the normal rules. Most Hermetic magi however, do not have
other Supernatural Abilities. Alternatively, the text may contain the
rites and practices needed to perform a magical spell or ritual
associated with an ancient magical tradition.

**Relics** are the mystical devices or sacred items enchanted by
practitioners of the tradition, and incorporating unique aspects of that
tradition. Additionally, a relic may be an on-going mystical effect
caused by the magical tradition. Like Hermetic magical devices, a magus
is able to investigate the device to learn its secrets and unlock the
methods used to craft it.

**Teachers** are individuals who possess the Supernatural Abilities
associated with the ancient magic and are able and willing to instruct a
Hermetic magus. For contemporary traditions of non-Hermetic magic, such
individuals are relatively accessible, although close collaboration with
a "hedge wizard" might harm a maga's reputation. The ghosts of
practitioners of extinct traditions may remain in Mythic Europe, and
might be convinced to teach a maga.

For every season a magus spends investigating a source of insight, make
a stress roll of Intelligence + Magic Theory against an Ease Factor of
18. Inventive Genius adds three to this roll, and some sources of
insight may add their own modifiers. If the roll succeeds, the magus
gains an insight. If it fails, he learns nothing now, but may try again
in another season. He may do other things before returning to his study.
On a botch, the magus thinks he has an insight, but does not. He
realizes this if he creates an effect, as described below, in an attempt
to use the insight; the final product is entirely Hermetic, or simply
non-functional.

A single source can generally only provide a single insight, although
there may be rare exceptions. The same source provides the same insight
for any magus who studies it.

Creating the Effect

A particular insight allows the researcher to create one, specified
effect. This effect might be a spell, or an effect enchanted into an
item. It could, conceivably, be another laboratory project; anything
that uses a Lab Total and creates something. However, spells are by far
the most common, followed by item enchantments. The magus must
experiment while creating the effect, as he is most certainly stretching
the boundaries of Hermetic magic.

The researcher does not get to choose the effect for which he receives
insight, and as the level of the effect is fixed, the insight might be
for an effect he cannot yet invent. For example, the effect might be
level 40, while the researcher has a Lab Total of 32. In that case, the
researcher can increase his Lab Total and then work on the effect.

The troupe should decide on the effects that result from particular
pieces of insight, choosing ones that advance the saga without upsetting
play balance. Player characters can vary things as much as they like
once they fully integrate the system, so the restrictions at this stage
should be accepted with good grace.

The researcher must invent exactly the effect inspired by the insight.
He may not vary the Range, Duration, or Target, or any other parameters.
As the magus must experiment while inventing the effect, the result may
be slightly different, as a result of rolls on the Extraordinary Results
table.

A spell is cast like a normal Formulaic spell, and characters with
Flexible Formulaic Magic may vary it at casting time in the normal way.
The spell may also be Mastered, again in the normal way.

The effect created may bend or break the limits of magic, as it
incorporates non-Hermetic elements. Setting the level of the effect may
well require a judgment call by the troupe, as it may do something for
which there is no Hermetic guideline.

If the effect is successfully created, the magus gains a number of
breakthrough points equal to the magnitude of the effect. This applies
even if the final effect is warped or has a side effect. These points
are added to the magus\'s running total, and he must find another source
of insight before repeating the procedure.

The effect produced in this way can be reproduced by other Hermetic
magi. However, they can only do so if they have access to a Laboratory
Text describing it, and it is not possible to vary the effect in any
way; it must be reproduced exactly as it was initially created.
Reproducing the effect in this way does not grant breakthrough points
unless the reproducing magus also gains the relevant insight, whether
from investigating the same item or from reading the original
investigator\'s Laboratory Texts. It is possible to reproduce the effect
first, and study the insight Laboratory Texts later.

After the Breakthrough

Minor Breakthroughs are usable immediately in the game, and are
understandable by all Hermetic magi. New Ranges or Durations may be
incorporated into new spells or items, and the Laboratory Texts
distributed for a spell may be used by another Hermetic magus without
his needing to research the Breakthrough. Any magus who has created an
effect using the Breakthrough can then use that Range of Duration freely
in his other spells, and any magus trained by that magus, in either Arts
or spells, may also do so.

Major and Hermetic Breakthroughs must be taught to Hermetic magi
directly. An Ability may be taught in the usual way, either in person or
through books. The discoverer converts his breakthrough points into
experience points in the new Ability, so that a magus who accrued 50
breakthrough points to integrate an Ability would start with a score of
4.

A new Virtue may be Initiated according to the normal rules for
Mysteries. The discoverer gains the Virtue when he completes the
integration, and does not need to be Initiated. He does need to design
an Initiation Script, following the rules in the Long-Term Events
chapter (page @@)*.* The Virtue can also be taught to an apprentice,
following the rules given earlier. In theory, it could be taught to any
magus, but the penalties are likely to make that impossible in practice.

A second Major Breakthrough integrates a Major or Hermetic Breakthrough
completely into Hermetic magic. If this succeeds, any magus may create
an effect using the Breakthrough as long as he has a Lab Text, and then
may use the Breakthrough freely. As for Minor Breakthroughs, the same
applies to any magus taught Arts or spells by a magus who understands
the Breakthrough. Experimentation is always suitable for this second
Breakthrough, and integration may be used if there are suitable
non-Hermetic traditions to study.

Ink of Hermes

This ink (also called "Hermaic Ink") is mentioned in many alchemical
texts. The ingredients are four drams of myrrh, three karian figs, seven
pits of Nikolaus dates, seven dried pine cones, seven piths of
single-stemmed wormwood, seven wings of the Hermaic ibis, and spring
water. The ingredients are burned, reduced, and mixed.

Shape and Material Bonuses Table

Adze +2 beautify wood structures

Agate +3 air

+5 protection from storms

+7 protection from venom

Alabaster +2 forgiving

+4 mental acuity

Alder Wood +2 royalty

+1 resist decay

Almond Wood +3 Creo Herbam

Aloe +3 friendship

Amber +3 controlling movement

+3 Corpus

Amethyst +3 versus poison

+4 temperance

+7 versus drunkenness

+3 dreams

+2 wealth

+2 hearing

Amulet Bearing the Sigils of Angels +7 ward against demons

+7 banish demons

Anchor +3 prevent movement

Animal Bone +4 harm or destroy animals

Animal Hide +7 turn into appropriate animal

Apple Wood +1 longevity

+1 Corpus

Aquamarine +3 water

Armillary Sphere +5 display the heavens

+5 celestial time

Armor +7 protect wearer

Arrow +2 aiming

+3 direction

Artifacts from Pompeii and Herculaneum +3 volcanoes

Ash (Burned Debris) +2 burning things

+5 affect things that have been burned

+2 Ignem

Ash Wood +2 harm people

Aspen Wood +5 cure fever

+2 cure disease

Astrolabe +5 astrology

+5 measure the stars and heavens

+5 navigation

Auger +2 shape wood

+2 puncture wood

Axe +4 destroy wood

Bag/Sack +3 moving things into or out of

+5 trapping things within

Bandage +4 healing wounds

Basalt +3 Ignem

+3 Perdo

Basilisk Eye +8 kill at a distance

Basket +3 create things within

+4 preserve contents

+5 create food within

+2 collect items

Bed +6 affect sleep and dreams

Beech Wood +3 knowledge

Bell +5 warning

Bellows +4 create wind

+5 strengthen fire

Belt or Girdle +3 affect strength

Beryl +3 water

Billhook +2 pruning

Birch Wood +3 childbirth

+1 Creo

Blackthorn Wood +6 guardians

+2 dark fay

Bloodstone +4 blood and wounds

Boat +3 sailing

Bookshelf +3 hide things within

+4 protect things within

Boots +5 affect walking

Bow +5 destroy things at a distance

Brass +4 demons, devils, and angels

+3 music

+3 Ignem

Bronze +3 Terram

+5 darkness

Candle, Black +2 summon demons

Candle Made of Goat Fat +3 summon demons

Cappadocian Salt +6 purifying effects

Carving of Behemoth +3 great size

Cask +3 induce drunkenness

Cat\'s Eye +3 versus malign Corpus

Catoblepas Esophagus +7 kill or harm humans

Cedar Wood +2 binding spirits

+5 any effect with Mentem and Herbam requisites

Chalice +4 detect poison within

+5 transform or create liquid in

Chalk, Blue +2 wards against demons

Cherry Wood +4 bloodshed

Chestnut Wood +4 honesty

+3 justice

Chimera Tongue +8 create fire

Cinnabar +5 dragons

+4 wealth

+4 language

+3 long life

Cinnamon +4 Imaginem

> +2 destroying ghosts

Cinquefoil +4 resist poison

+3 drive away demons

+2 making amends

Clam Shell +2 protection

Cleaver +2 butchery

+3 Perdo Animal

Clear Glass +4 invisibility

+5 seeing through something

Cloak +3 flight

+4 transform wearer

+5 alter/suppress wearer\'s image

Cloth Shears +2 shaping fabrics

Coin +4 induce greed

+4 wealth and mercantile

Collar +6 control wearer

Comb +5 beauty

+7 affect hair

Container +5 create or transform within

Copper +3 bloodshed

+2 passion

+4 deftness

+4 effects that change its own shape

+2 sex magic

Coral, Red +10 versus demons

Cross +5 ward away supernatural

+5 cause damage to Infernal creatures

+5 banish demons

Crowbar +2 moving stone

Crown +2 wisdom

+3 control people

+5 gain respect, authority

Crystal +5 water-related effect

Cypress Wood +3 spirits

+3 necromancy

Dagger/ Knife +2 precise destruction

+3 betrayal, assassination

+3 poisoning

Diamond +5 versus demons

Dividers +2 measuring

Dogwood +5 pixies

Door +5 warding

Doorway +5 magical transportation

+7 affect movement through

+7 magical gates and portals

Doum Palm Leaf +3 controlling instincts and base emotions

Down +3 silence

Dragon Eye +8 protection against ghosts

Dragon Heart +7 Intellego

Dragon Teeth +6 invisibility

Drum +2 cause fear

+3 create storms and thunder

+5 deafening

Earring +5 affect hearing

Elder Wood +4 malicious magic

+1 Vim

Electrum +3 scrying

+4 Muto Terram

+3 deception

Elm Wood +2 death and decay

Emerald +4 incite love or passion

+7 snakes and dragonkind

+2 calm

Fan +4 banish weather phenomena

+4 create or control winds

Fig Wood +3 sex magic

+3 gambling

Fir Wood +3 darkness

+1 malicious faeries

Fired Clay +4 contain or protect from fire

Flail +3 harvesting grain

Floor +7 affect movement across

Frankincense +3 Perdo Vim

+3 dreams

+4 cleanse a place of Infernal influence

Garnet +4 repel insects

+2 strengthen body and mind

+3 bonds of commitment

+2 vigor

+2 navigation

Glove +4 affect things by touch

+4 manipulation at a distance

Gold +4 affect wealth

+4 induce greed

+4 nobility

+4 peace

+2 health

Granite +2 wealth

+3 Terram

Green Turquoise +4 necromancy

Griffin Feather +6 flying

+5 strength

Hall +3 magical transportation

+6 affect movement through

Handsaw +3 delicately shape wood

Hat +4 affect image of self

Hatchet +4 destroy wood

Hawthorn Wood +3 wards

Hazel Wood +3 divination

+1 good judgement

Hearth +5 destroy things within

+7 create fire and heat

Helmet +4 affect wearer\'s mind/emotions

+6 affect wearer\'s sight

Hippogriff Liver +6 flying

+5 freedom from restraints

Holly Wood +2 inflict wounds

+2 inflict pain

Hornbeam Wood +6 strength

+6 Vim against hostile magic

Horseshoe +2 warding

+6 affect horse\'s movement

Hourglass +3 increasing speed

+7 timing and alarms

Human Bone +3 destroy the human mind

+4 destroy the human body

Human Skull +4 destroy human body

+5 destroy human mind

+5 destroy or control ghosts

+10 destroy or control ghost of particular skull

Hyacinth +2 healing

Hydra Teeth +8 regeneration

+6 Creo

Ink of Hermes +3 Vim

+5 books

Iron +7 harm or repel faeries

Iron Shackles +8 bind faeries

Ivory +5 healing

Jade +4 Aquam

Jasper +2 healing

+2 versus demons

Jet +2 protection

+3 darkness

Jewelry/Clothing +4 transform self

+4 protect self

+2 move self

Lamp +4 create fire

+7 produce light

Linden Wood +2 protection against weapons

+1 good fortune

Lead +4 wards

+3 summoning or binding ghosts and spirits

+3 hatred

Lemon Wood +5 hearing

Leucrota Tongue +6 mimic human voices

Lilac Wood +2 travel

Lion's Blood +4 protection from wild beasts

+3 courage

+2 leadership

Lion\'s Mane +5 strength, courage, pride

Living Tree Triple the bonus for the type of wood (oak, ash, etc), but
not for wood as such. This only applies if the whole living tree is
enchanted.

Lyre +3 create sounds

+5 affect music

Magnes Stone (Female) +3 purification

+2 invisibility

Magnes Stone (Male) +7 control iron

+3 divination

Magnet +4 Rego Corpus

+4 Rego Terram

+2 Rego

Magnetite +3 Animal

Mallet +2 precision

Manacles +4 binding

Marble +5 wards

+3 beauty

+2 cold

Mask +2 affect wearer\'s sight

+2 affect wearer's breathing

+3 hiding

+7 disguise

Mason Chisel +2 shape stone

Mast +2 protection from temptation

Mercury +3 arts and sciences

+3 Aquam

+3 Terram

+5 Muto

Mirror +6 display images

+3 summon or bind ghosts

+7 illusions

+5 see the truth

Myrmecoleon Exoskeleton +6 deprivation and starvation

Myrrh +3 spirits

Necklace +4 affect breathing and speaking

Net +5 immobilization

Oak Wood +7 protection from storms

Oar +4 affect currents

Obsidian +5 darkness

Onyx +4 darkness

+4 death

Opal +4 travel

+6 eyes

+2 images

+2 invisibility

+4 memory

+2 imagination

Orange Tree Wood +5 sight

Palm Wood +3 animating wood

Panpipes +3 affect emotions

+5 control children

+5 revelry

+6 affect faerie emotions

Panther of Virtue's Hide +6 song and melodious sounds

Pearl +5 detect or eliminate poisons

Pelican of Virtue's Beak +8 healing and nurturing

Pepper +2 Perdo

Peridot +3 protection against nightmares

Phoenix Ashes +11 rejuvenation and regeneration

Phylactery +5 protect wearer

Pick +4 destroy stone

Pin Feather +2 Auram

+5 flight

Pine Wood +3 light

+1 friendly faeries

Pitchfork +2 gathering reaped grain

Plum Wood +2 blood

Pure Honey +5 spiritual travel

+2 preservation

Quartz +5 invisibility

Quill +7 scribing

Rat Skull +3 cause disease

Red Gold +4 war

+1 Perdo

Remora of Virtue's Fins +7 slow or halt a moving object

Rhodocrosite +3 forgetfulness

> +2 memories
>
> +3 binding wounds

Ring +2 constant effect

Rock Crystal +3 healing

+5 clairvoyance

+3 ice

+4 clarity

Room +4 create things within

+6 affect everything within at once

Rope or Cord +2 strangulation

+4 restraint or binding

Rowan Wood +4 protection against malicious magic

+1 Vim

Ruby +3 affect blood

+4 leadership in war

+6 fire-related effect

+3 battle wounds

+2 courage

Rug +3 affect those upon it

Saddle +4 affect horse

+7 affect riding

Saffron +4 physical strength

Salamander of Virtue's Skin +8 extinguish fire

Sapphire +2 knowledge

+2 versus malign Corpus

+3 healing

+3 reducing anger

+2 Perdo Vim against spirits

Sardonyx +2 versus malign Corpus

Scales +3 weighing goods and money

Scythe +3 reaping

+3 Year-Duration effects

+4 effects expressly causing death

Sea Shell +2 the sea

+3 sea creatures

Serpentine +3 vs. infection and animal poison

Shackles +6 restraint or magical binding

Sharp Blade +2 shape leather

Shearing Shears +2 fleecing

Shield +5 protection

Ship +5 sailing

Ship Sail +4 affect winds

+7 sailing

Siberian Six-Legged Antelope Hoof +6 speed and quickness

Sickle +2 harvesting

Silver +10 harm lycanthropes

+5 lycanthropes in general

+2 Intellego

+1 Terram

+3 protect spirits

Small Hammer +2 building

Snake Tongue +6 lying

+3 deception

Snip +2 shape metal

Spade +4 move or destroy earth

Star Ruby +5 conjure/control occult entities

Sulfur +3 binding tongues

+2 sowing discord

+2 preserving or decaying

+4 demons

Sun Scarab +4 detect magic

Sword +3 block single attack

+4 harm human and animal bodies

Tablet +2 command spirits

Tin +3 weakness

+1 law

Tongs +2 controlling metal

Topaz +4 leadership

+4 strength, courage, pride

+5 controlling wild beasts

Toy +4 control children

Trowel +2 building

True Purple +10 royalty

+7 rulership and authority

+5 control people

Turquoise +4 necromancy

Unicorn Horn +11 fertility

+10 detect poison

+8 healing

Vent +7 affect air passing through it

Violet Amethyst +4 ascendancy over masses

+7 versus drunkenness

Walnut Wood +4 mind

Wand/Staff +2 repel things

+3 project bolt or other missile

+4 control things at a distance

+4 destroy things at a distance

Waterskin +5 create liquid within

Whip +4 control human or animal body

+5 induce fear in animals

White Poplar Wood +4 mind

Willow Wood +4 restore limb

+1 cure wounds

Wood (Dead) +3 affect living wood

+4 affect dead wood

Wood from a Tree Struck by Lightning +2 Auram

Wood from a Twisted Tree in a Field +4 disfigure

+3 disguise

Yellow Sandalwood +3 binding people

Yew Wood +2 corpses

+2 visions

Yoke +4 control wearer

+5 enhance strength of wearer

Laboratory Personalization Rules

After settling in to her standard and average laboratory, a young maga
will sooner or later start to consider the possibilities of adding a
little personal touch and flavor to her workspace. This will help her to
feel a greater sense of identity and comfort with her own lab, but
perhaps more importantly, the lab will also become more effective in her
preferred areas of research. Needless to say, labs usually grow to
become colored according to the personal habits and magical specialties
of a magus. A long-established laboratory tells a great deal about its
owner, in its features and outfittings, as well as in its cleanliness
and orderliness.

In introducing the new statistics for laboratories, it may be helpful to
think of the lab as a character in its own right: it has
Characteristics, Virtues and Flaws, Specializations (which are analogous
to Abilities for human characters), and possibly also Personality
Traits.

Each laboratory is characterized by a set of eight Characteristics, with
a standard (default) lab starting with scores of 0 in each. Unlike human
Characteristics, however, these values are relatively easy to change.
Labs with a positive Warping Characteristic also have one or more
Personality Traits. Each lab may also have a number of Virtues and
Flaws, which may be Major (worth 3 points), Minor (worth 1 point), or
Free (0 points), just as for human characters. Certain Virtues and Flaws
may grant a lab a small number of Specializations. A Specialization adds
its score to any Lab Total with a particular Art or type of activity.
For example, a lab might have Specializations Spells 1 and Creo 2.

Laboratory Characteristics

The eight Laboratory Characteristics are as follows:

**Size, Refinement, General Quality, Upkeep, Safety, Warping, Health,
Aesthetics**

Apart from Warping, which cannot be negative, each Characteristic may be
positive, negative, or zero. A standard lab starts with all
Characteristics at zero.

To determine the Characteristics of a non-standard laboratory, proceed
as follows:

1\. Select the Size and Refinement scores according to the descriptions
of these Characteristics below.

2\. Set the Safety to be equal to the Refinement. If the occupied Size
(see below) is greater than zero, subtract it from the Safety. Set the
scores of the remaining five Characteristics to zero.

3\. For each of the lab\'s Virtues and Flaws, apply any adjustments to
the Characteristics that they specify.

Size

Size specifies broadly how much floor space is provided by the physical
structure of the laboratory. The larger the laboratory is, the more
benefits (Virtues) it can accommodate. Thus, each point of Size adds to
the maximum permitted number of Virtue points minus Flaw points (see
Virtues and Flaws, below).

It is sometimes necessary to use the **occupied Size**, which might be
less than the Size. More often than not, the laboratory is filled to
capacity (there is no more room for extra points of Virtues), in which
case the occupied Size is simply equal to the Size. However, if the lab
space is not fully used, then the occupied Size is equal to the Size
minus the number of free points available for new Virtues. (We will see
below that this is exactly the same as the number of points of Virtues
minus Flaws, minus the Refinement.) For example, a lab with Size +4 and
Refinement 0, and two points of Virtues minus Flaws, has an occupied
Size of +2. In this case, the occupied Size is given in parentheses, so
for this example, the Size would be written as +4 (+2).

Despite the extra Virtues that they may accommodate, most magi do not
opt to have a significantly above-average sized lab. This is because
labs with positive Size have two drawbacks:

Firstly, the more a laboratory is expanded, the more unmanageable and
dangerous it becomes --- it becomes harder to oversee it all, and it
takes longer to get around it. Magi can only cope with a certain extent
of equipment and outfittings, before they begin to lose track of it all.
For this reason, and as stated above, the occupied Size (if positive)
subtracts from the lab\'s base Safety. (Since Refinement has the
opposite effect, however, this penalty may be offset by taking a
Refinement at least as high as the Size.) There is no Safety benefit to
an occupied Size less than zero.

Secondly, it looks slightly ridiculous if a chamber is far larger than
it needs to be to accommodate a laboratory. It is not aesthetically
pleasing if, for example, all your furniture and equipment squats in the
middle of a much larger room, surrounded by an echo chamber of unused
space which merely gathers dust and cobwebs. For this reason, for every
full two points by which the Size exceeds the occupied Size, you should
take the Empty Flaw. For example, a lab with Size +5 (0) should take the
Empty Flaw twice.

Size Square feet

--3 100

--2 200

--1 350

0 500

+1 650

+2 800

+3 1000

+4 1250

+5 1500

A lab cannot be smaller than Size --3. However, there is no upper limit;
for each additional 500 square feet beyond 1500, add a further +1 to
Size.

Refinement

Refinement is a measure of the expertise and time taken to assemble the
contents of the lab efficaciously. The more experienced a maga is, the
more efficiently she can make use of the available space. Just like
Size, therefore, each point of Refinement adds to the maximum permitted
number of Virtue points minus Flaw points (see Virtues and Flaws,
below). Highly-refined labs can thus either be smaller than normal,
without needing to suffer Flaws, or permit more points of Virtues than
would otherwise be possible.

A freshly-assembled lab starts with a Refinement score of 0, unless the
assembler has a Magic Theory of less than 3, in which case its
Refinement score is equal to her Magic Theory -- 3. However, for magi
with a Magic Theory of more than 3, the starting Refinement score is
always 0, no matter how high their Magic Theory.

The rules for increasing a lab\'s Refinement are quite straightforward:
You need to be familiar with the lab in question (as a rule of thumb,
you need to have worked in the lab for a number of years equal to the
existing Refinement score) and need a Magic Theory equal to at least the
desired Refinement score, plus 3. Increasing the Refinement by one point
takes a season of work, during which time the lab\'s contents are
optimized and rearranged. For example, if you have a Magic Theory of 5
and a lab with a Refinement 0, you can spend one season to increase the
Refinement to +1, and a further season to increase it to +2.

Such a season of work also gives a chance to gain the Highly Organized
and Spotless Virtues or to gain or lose the Hidden Defect Flaw. Make an
Intelligence + Magic Theory stress roll. If this meets an Ease Factor of
12, Highly Organized is gained. If this also meets an Ease Factor of 15,
then any existing Hidden Defect Flaw may be spotted and corrected (the
Flaw is removed). However if the roll results in a botch, the Hidden
Defect Flaw is gained. If you wish, you may also make a Tidy (or other
relevant Personality Trait) roll against an Ease Factor of 9. If this
succeeds, the Spotless Virtue is gained. See below for the effects of
these two Virtues and the Hidden Defect Flaw.

Whenever the Refinement score increases by one, the occupied Size
decreases by one, since there is one extra spare point made available
for Virtues. Since the base Safety of a lab is equal to Refinement --
occupied Size (if positive), whenever the Refinement score increases by
one, the net Safety increase is either one point (if the new occupied
Size is negative) or two points (otherwise).

For example, Darius (when he has a Magic Theory of 4) spends a season to
increase the Refinement of his standard laboratory (with all
Characteristics equal to zero, and no Virtues and Flaws) to +1. This
causes the occupied Size to drop to --1 and the Safety to increase to
+1. There is now free space for one Minor Virtue. If, in the next
season, he installs such a Virtue, the occupied Size returns to 0, and
the Safety stays at +1. Later on, he has an extension to the chamber
constructed, taking its Size to +1 (0), and allowing space for one more
Minor Virtue. When he spends a further season to install such a Virtue,
the occupied Size increases to +1, and the Safety thus drops to 0. Later
still (when Darius has increased his Magic Theory to 5) he spends a
further season to increase the Refinement to +2. This causes the
occupied Size to drop to 0 and the Safety to increase to +2. When he
spends another season to install his third Minor Virtue, the occupied
Size returns to +1, and the Safety drops to +1.

Size and Refinement Summary

**Limit of Virtue points minus Flaw points: Size + Refinement**

**Occupied Size: current Virtue points -- Flaw points -- Refinement**

**Base Safety of lab: Refinement -- occupied Size (if greater than
zero)**

General Quality

General Quality is simply an overall measure of the effectiveness of the
lab in all areas. General Quality adds to all Lab Totals. This bonus (or
penalty, if the General Quality is negative) applies in addition to any
other Lab Total adjustments (such as from Specializations). This
Characteristic has no effect on teaching (except for teaching spells,
which uses a Lab Total) or the scribing of texts.

Upkeep

Upkeep specifies the monetary cost of building and maintaining the lab.
For example, a lab with priceless ingredients may have a better General
Quality, but it is also more expensive to maintain. A lab with an Upkeep
of 0 costs 5 pounds to build and 1 pound per typical year of use to
maintain. See Chapter 6: Covenants for the costs of labs with other
Upkeep scores.

There may be insufficient money to maintain a lab at its current Upkeep.
In this case, after two seasons of use with neglected maintenance, a new
Flaw is gained automatically (or an existing Virtue lost), which reduces
the Upkeep. This may need to be repeated (after another two seasons)
until the Upkeep drops to an affordable level. For example, Semita
Errabunda experiences a temporary financial crisis, and can only afford
to spend one pound per year on Darius\'s Upkeep +2 laboratory (which
normally needs three pounds per year). After two seasons, the lab gains
a Flaw which reduces the Upkeep to +1, and after a further two seasons,
another Flaw, taking the Upkeep to 0.

If a new Virtue or Flaw (or its removal) results in a increase to
Upkeep, then the difference between the old and new build costs (which
are 1 pound per 2 points of the lab; see Chapter 6: Covenants) must be
paid. For example, raising the Upkeep from +2 to +4 (an increase of 70
points) costs 35 pounds. Thereafter, maintenance is paid at the new,
higher rate. However if the Upkeep score should drop, there is no
refund.

Safety

The higher the Safety, the lower the risk of any lab accidents, and vice
versa. The Safety score subtracts its value from the number of botch
dice on all lab activities. (Thus, a negative Safety results in *more*
botch dice.) Labs with a zero or better Safety are fairly trustworthy
places --- there is only a significant danger of an accident with
certain categories of lab activities (those requiring a stress roll,
such as when using experimentation, or when studying from vis). Labs
with a negative Safety, however, are deemed unsafe. With an unsafe lab,
there is always the risk of an accident, no matter what type of lab work
is undertaken. While some magi are prepared to accept the level of risk
of a slightly negative Safety, such as --1 or --2, it is a very reckless
magus who is prepared to work repeatedly in a highly unsafe lab.

For each season of work in an unsafe lab, roll a simple die. (This extra
roll is in addition to any others which may be made, such as for
experimentation or study from vis.) If the result is less than or equal
to the absolute value of the Safety (in other words, ignore the minus
sign), there is a chance of suffering a lab botch, in which case make a
roll the usual number of botch dice (including the extra dice for having
a negative Safety). For this roll, you cannot have no botch dice; there
is always a minimum of at least one. In the event of a botch, a lab
accident is suffered --- consult the Disaster sub-chart of the
Experimentation: Extraordinary Results chart (see page @@).

For example, Helvius spends a season to invent a spell (something that
would normally be safe, and not require a roll) in his laboratory, which
has a Safety of --2. Helvius\'s player rolls a simple die, getting a 1,
which is less than or equal to 2, so there is a chance of suffering a
lab botch. He then rolls for botch with two botch dice (the base number
of none for this activity, plus two for the Safety score). One of the
dice comes up as 0, for a lab accident. On a single botch, Helvius
suffers a single Warping Point. He got off quite lightly.

Warping

A laboratory with a zero Warping score produces consistent and
predictable results (at least, it does if it isn\'t unsafe and you
don\'t use experimentation). A lab with a positive Warping score,
however, sometimes yields altered or unintended results. For each season
of labwork, roll a simple die. If the result is less than or equal to
the Warping score, then the product of that season\'s work (be it an
item, spell, or something else) suffers Warping. Warping on labwork is
not the same as for characters; instead refer to the Experimentation:
Extraordinary Results chart (see page @@). If the outcome of the simple
die was odd, roll once for a Side Effect. If the outcome was even, roll
once for a Modified Effect. Effects should be chosen as appropriate for
the cause(s) of the Warping. For example, an item enchanted in an
invisible lab might be found to be invisible itself, once it is finished
and removed from the lab.

A lab with a positive Warping score should also be assigned one or more
Personality Traits, with a total score equal to the Warping score. For
example, a lab with a Warping score of +1, due to faerie ingredients,
might gain the Personality Trait Whimsical +1. These Personality Traits
tend to color the experience of the lab\'s owner and any other residents
or guests, and are suggestive of suitable Warping effects, both for
Warping on labwork, and on any character Warping suffered by the
inhabitant(s). At the storyguide\'s discretion, a Personality Trait may
be added to a Lab Total for an effect which matches it closely, or
subtracted from a Lab Total for an opposite effect.

Health

The environment of a laboratory might be either beneficial or
detrimental to the health of its owner. A lab with a positive Health
score might be especially snug, comfortable, or clean, whereas a lab
with a negative Health might be drafty, awkward to get around, or bear a
foul stench. The Health score adds to any Wound Recovery rolls for
inhabitants of the lab. Also, half of the Health score (rounded down)
adds to the Living Conditions modifier (used for Aging rolls) for
inhabitants, provided that they spend at least half of the year there.
In this way, the Living Conditions modifier of a lab (or sanctum) might
differ from that of the covenant as a whole.

For example, the lab of Igor Rastvan has a Health of +2, giving +1 to
the Living Conditions modifier. His covenant of Roznov has a base Living
Conditions modifier of +2 for magi, therefore his total Living
Conditions modifier is +3.

Aesthetics

Aesthetics is a measure of the impressiveness, splendor, and luxury of
the laboratory. Whilst this is mostly a question of personal comfort and
preferences, the aesthetic quality of a lab may affect the prestige
enjoyed by its owner, influencing her standing amongst her peers. The
Aesthetics score is indicative of the typical impression received by
visitors to the lab, and whether or not it is favorable. For every point
of Aesthetics, either positive or negative, the owner gains five
experience points in an appropriate Reputation. These points might not
all be gained immediately, especially if few people visit the
laboratory. Sooner or later, however, rumors will spread about just what
is believed to be inside, even if it is mostly speculation, especially
among the covenfolk.

For example, Lutisse has a lab with an Aesthetics of --2. She gains ten
experience points in her Impoverished Hedge Wizard Reputation.

Laboratory Specializations

Laboratories that have Specializations are particularly well-suited to
one or more types of laboratory work or to certain Arts, providing a
bonus (in almost all cases, to the Lab Total) equal to their value.
These benefits arise, either by design or by accident, from certain
properties of the lab and its outfittings according to the law of
sympathy. For example, a brightly lit lab is more suited to Imaginem, a
lab with a water feature is suited to Aquam, and a lab with caged slaves
is suited to Corpus.

A lab can have at most two activity Specializations, plus four Art
Specializations (at most two of which can be Techniques). Bonuses to Lab
Totals from all applicable Specializations are cumulative. The value of
an Art Specialization adds to any Lab Total (but *not* Advancement
Total) involving that Art. The following is a list of possible activity
Specializations:

**Experimentation**: The value of the Specialization adds to all Lab
Totals when experimenting (see page @@).

**Familiar**: The value of the Specialization adds to all Lab Totals
when binding or enchanting a familiar.

**Items**: The value of the Specialization adds to all Lab Totals when
enchanting items and when investigating enchanted items.

**Longevity Rituals**: The value of the Specialization adds to all Lab
Totals when creating a Longevity Ritual.

**Spells**: The value of the Specialization adds to all Lab Totals when
inventing a spell, including when being taught the spell.

**Teaching**: The value of the Specialization adds to all Training and
Teaching Source Qualities, whenever training or teaching is performed in
the lab. However, this can provide a bonus of at most three points.
(Note that teaching spells does not involve a Source Quality, and so is
not covered here.)

**Texts**: The value of the Specialization adds to all Lab Totals when
creating an effect with the benefit of a Laboratory Text, as well as to
Lab Totals for translating Laboratory Texts. For every full three points
of this Specialization, you may also add one to Profession: Scribe
whenever copying Laboratory Texts and books, and one to the relevant
Language Ability when writing Laboratory Texts and books.

**Vis Extraction**: The value of the Specialization adds to the Lab
Total for vis extraction.

Specializations are gained due to Virtues (most notably Features and
Magic Items) and sometimes also due to Flaws. Therefore, to determine
the Specializations of your magus\'s lab (if any), simply total up the
Specializations specified for each of its Virtues and Flaws (for some of
them, you are able to choose the Specialization).

If you find that the laboratory has more than the allowed number of
Specializations, you will have to drop one or more of them. You do not
need to drop any Virtues or Flaws; just choose which Specializations you
least want, and strike them out. Once made, however, the choice of
dropped Specializations is hard to change --- the magus must spend a
season reconfiguring the laboratory to do so, which can be combined with
a season of work to improve the Refinement of the laboratory.

Laboratory Specializations and Appearance

**Experimentation**: The lab might be equipped with bizarre custom
outfittings, or have a non-standard configuration which appears
confusing or even dangerous to the uninitiated.

**Familiar**: Such a lab often resembles one with a specialization in
Animal. It likely features some kind of pen or dwelling for a familiar
prominently.

**Items**: The lab usually resembles a kind of workshop, with a great
variety of tools, and is likely to be smelly, dirty, or noisy.

**Longevity Rituals**: The lab often closely resembles one with a
specialization in Creo or Corpus. It might feature a pallet where a live
subject can be examined.

**Spells**: This Specialization is not usually immediately obvious, as
the lab differs in only subtle ways from the norm. It may feature a
large empty space, such as a summoning circle, where spells are tested.

**Teaching**: The lab is usually comfortable, with a preordained
position for both master and pupil, such as a desk before a teaching
pulpit.

**Texts**: The lab usually features a desk or bookstand prominently,
contains a wide variety of writing materials, and is well lit.

**Vis Extraction**: Such a lab often features some kind of measuring or
refining contraption, such as an elaborate still, and numerous
containers for vis.

**Creo**: The lab is often brightly lit, clean, or contains many growing
things. It is usually a pleasant environment.

**Intellego**: Such an esoteric lab might contain many books or
astronomical devices, as well as viewing objects such as orbs or a
scrying pool.

**Muto**: The lab might appear chaotic or in a state of constant change.
Perhaps the owner is continually rearranging things.

**Perdo**: The lab might be dark or dirty, possibly containing decaying
or dead things. It is often an unpleasant place.

**Rego**: Such a lab is tidy and well ordered, with everything neatly
arranged.

**Animal**: This Specialization is usually evident from the lab\'s feral
smell. It may contain numerous fauna specimens, dead or alive, and the
floor may be littered with straw, fur, or droppings.

**Aquam**: The lab almost always features some kind of water, either
still or flowing, and may be damp.

**Auram**: Such a lab is often spacious, with a high ceiling, and might
feature a window or balcony, or even be exposed to the elements.

**Corpus**: The lab might contain human corpses and body parts, such as
blood, bones, and skin, or even live subjects. Perhaps it resembles a
surgery, with the tools of a chirurgeon present.

**Herbam**: Such a lab, predictably, features plants, either in pots, or
growing out of the floor or walls, or the lab itself might be built of
living wood. It may have a smell of foliage, blossom, or wood.

**Ignem**: The lab is usually very well heated, with multiple fireplaces
or a furnace, or it may be lit by many hundreds of candles. It may smell
of smoke or sulfur.

**Imaginem**: The lab may be extravagantly decorated, or even partly
illusory. Equally, it may give the impression of having some other
specialization, since this lab may not be all it seems.

**Mentem**: Such a lab is often puzzling and elaborate, and may feature
esoteric toys or ornate mirrors.

**Terram**: The lab is often subterranean, and is usually solidly built,
with an earthy or mineral smell. Many samples of metals, gems, or
crystals may be present.

**Vim**: Such a Specialization is usually hard to spot, as there is no
characteristic appearance, apart perhaps from an increased overall
complexity.

Laboratory Virtues and Flaws

Just as for characters, Virtues for labs reflect some kind of merit,
improvement, or advantage, whereas Flaws reflect a drawback, deficiency,
or story opportunity. The most important rule to bear in mind is that
the number of points spent on Virtues, minus the number of points spent
on Flaws, cannot exceed the Size + Refinement of the lab. The sum of
these two Characteristics specifies the overall available space for the
installment of improvements. Virtues with a point cost take up a certain
amount of space, whereas Flaws with a point cost free up space, or allow
the lab to be smaller. Free Virtues and Flaws make a negligible
contribution to space. For example, a lab with a Size of +1 and a
Refinement of +1 (for a total of +2) might have one Major Virtue and one
Minor Virtue (+4 points) and two Minor Flaws (--2 points) as well as a
number of Free Virtues and Flaws. A standard lab of Size 0 or greater
starts with no Virtues and Flaws, but a lab smaller than the standard or
less refined automatically starts with sufficient points of Flaws to pay
for its negative Size + Refinement.

Most laboratory Virtues and Flaws can only be taken once --- those few
that can be taken multiple times are asterisked in the list below. Two
of these Virtues in particular, Feature and Magic Item, come in a
multitude of types and are described in more detail later. The
storyguide may always adjust the benefits of particular Virtues and
Flaws as she sees fit, and is encouraged to devise new ones in
consultation with the players.

The *Covenants* supplement includes a wider range of Virtues and Flaws
(from page 113), expanding on those given here.

Virtues

A laboratory has free space for one or more new Virtues if its current
points of Virtues minus points of Flaws is less than the Size +
Refinement, and thus the occupied Size is less than the Size. If there
are sufficient points of free space, a Virtue can be taken without
needing to take a Flaw. Otherwise, one or more Flaws must be taken
simultaneously to balance it. A magus who wishes to install a Virtue
(Minor or Major) into a standard laboratory thus has four choices:
either first spend a season to increase the Refinement to +1 (requiring
a Magic Theory of 4), accept a Flaw to balance the Virtue, somehow
increase the physical space of the existing lab, or move into a bigger
lab. Free Virtues have no point cost and are thus not restricted in this
way.

Virtues are not simply chosen and gained automatically --- there may be
a cost in time, money, or vis, and there may be additional specific
requirements (see the list below). As a general rule, it takes one
season of work to gain a Minor Virtue, and two seasons to gain a Major
Virtue. This time is occupied with construction or installing the
improvement. The person doing this work needs to have a Magic Theory
score at least three points higher than the lab\'s Refinement. Free
Virtues have no space and (usually) no seasonal construction
requirement. They may be gained in a day or so, if the relevant
materials are procured, or if the relevant circumstances are satisfied.

Sometimes, the magus might wish to lose Virtues. This is not always
possible, since some Virtues are due to fundamental properties of the
lab (such as its physical location) which cannot readily be changed.
Where it is possible, a Minor or Major Virtue can only be removed during
a season or more of work to improve the laboratory (either by increasing
the Refinement, or installing a different Virtue). For example, the
magus can remove an existing Lesser Feature and replace it with a new
one, in one season. Where it is possible to remove a Free Virtue, it can
usually be done in a day or so.

Flaws

Flaws may be chosen either due to choice or to general neglect, or
because you need to free up points of space to balance a new Virtue.
There is no limit on their number and they take effect immediately. In
the event of a lack of funds, you may also be forced to take a Flaw
resulting in a lower Upkeep (see the Upkeep section, above).

Just as for Virtues, some Flaws can later be removed, whereas others are
due to fundamental properties of the lab, and cannot be altered. If
removing a Minor or Major Flaw, the magus needs to have sufficient free
points of space, since the occupied Size will increase. Where it is
possible, removing a Free Flaw usually takes one season (unless
otherwise stated), removing a Minor Flaw also takes one season, and
removing a Major Flaw takes two seasons. This time is occupied with
repairing or restoring the faulty component, but it can be combined with
a season spent improving the Refinement. For example, a lab might start
out with Size --1, Refinement 0, and the Cramped Flaw. With a Magic
Theory of 4, one season of work will suffice both to increase the
Refinement to +1 and to lose the Cramped Flaw.

Build Point Cost for Starting Laboratories

If using the Customized Covenant Creation rules (page @@), the baseline
is that there is one standard laboratory (Size 0, Refinement 0) for each
member of the covenant. Extra (spare) labs cost 50 Build Points each.
For each magus that completely lacks a lab, 50 Build Points are gained.
To determine the Build Point cost of labs which are either larger or
smaller than average, multiply their Size Characteristics by 20.

One or more labs might start out with Minor or Major Virtues, if they
have sufficient space (or if they are balanced with Flaws). Each Minor
Virtue costs 10 Build Points and each Major Virtue costs 20 Build
Points. Free Virtues and all Flaws do not cost any Build Points. Note
that starting laboratories with negative Size need to take one or more
Flaws (Minor or Major) automatically.

For example, a covenant which starts with Size +2 labs for two of its
magi (80 Points), plus Size 0 labs for the remaining magi, a spare Size
0 lab (50 Points), with a total of three Minor Virtues (30 Points) and
one Major Virtue (20 Points) costs a total of 180 Build Points. If the
Build Point total for the labs is negative, Build Points are freed up
which may be spent elsewhere.

It is suggested that labs for starting magi in a Spring covenant should
begin with few or no Virtues or Flaws. Only those Virtues and Flaws
which are intrinsic to the structure or location should be taken. For
example, if the lab is underground, the Subterranean Flaw should be
taken. At the storyguide\'s option, a small number of Free Virtues and
an equal number of Free Flaws may be taken, provided that the Upkeep
does not increase beyond 0. If the covenant has the Wealth Boon, on the
other hand, then Free Virtues which require only an increase to Upkeep
may be taken without a corresponding Free Flaw, if desired. With the
Poverty Hook, it is suggested that the average Upkeep score for all labs
should not be higher than --2 (if Minor) or --5 (if Major) --- take a
sufficient number of Flaws accordingly.

Labs in established covenants, on the other hand, especially Autumn or
Winter covenants, might have more Virtues and Flaws, as might the labs
of experienced magi. The storyguide should determine the labs of
starting magi in an established covenant. For example, they might have
one or more Supernatural Virtues and Flaws. For experienced magi, the
Build Point total of the lab\'s Virtues should be subtracted from their
experience point total, instead of from the covenant\'s Build Point
total, assuming they were responsible for the improvements. This is due
to the time required to achieve the Virtues; each Minor Virtue, taking
one season, costs 10 points, and each Major Virtue, taking two seasons,
costs 20 points, according to the rules for generating magi after
apprenticeship (see page @@).

Structure Virtues and Flaws

These Virtues and Flaws are due to the physical structure and basic
arrangement of the laboratory, and its location. Gaining or losing them
usually entails some kind of construction project on or within the lab,
or on the immediate surrounds.

**Virtues (Major)**

**Greater Feature\***: The lab prominently features a unique and
extensive structure which aids certain types of lab work --- see the
list of possible Features below. +2 Aesthetics; 3 points on appropriate
Specialization(s).

**Natural Environment**: A swathe of natural scenery, such as forest,
desert, or a river, is located in the lab, or the lab is built in or
around it. +2 Aesthetics; 3 points among Specializations in Cr, An, Aq,
Au, He, Ig, or Te, depending upon terrain type.

**Virtues (Minor)**

**Extensive Stores**: The lab\'s large stores mean that it can withstand
shortages better. In the case of a lack of funds, the lab can last six
seasons before you have to take a Flaw to lower the Upkeep, instead of
the usual two. However you need to make a one-off payment of a number of
pounds equal to the lab\'s yearly maintenance cost, to stock up the
stores in the first place. Vis and dangerous materials can also be
stored more safely. +2 Safety.

**Gallery**: The lab is fitted with an interior gallery or platform,
designed to allow someone to view the whole of the lab without
disturbing it. +1 Safety, +1 Aesthetics; +1 Teaching.

**Lesser Feature\***: The lab features a unique structure which aids
certain types of lab work --- see the list of possible Features below.
+1 Aesthetics; 1 point on an appropriate Specialization.

**Virtues (Free)**

**Dedicated Building**: The lab (and probably the living quarters of the
owner) is in its own building, shared with no-one else. There are likely
to be fewer distractions. +1 Upkeep, +1 Aesthetics; +1 Re.

**Mobile**: The entire lab can be readily moved. For example, it might
be located on a ship or (if it is very small) a cart. This Virtue is
usually taken with the Unstable Flaw. +1 Experimentation.

**Superior Construction**: The lab benefits from distinguished
construction techniques, for example, high quality building materials
were used, or it was made by a master architect or a magus (such as with
the spell *Conjuring the Mystic Tower*). If constructing the building,
its cost is doubled. +1 Safety, +1 Aesthetics.

**Flaws (Free)**

**Deformed**: Part of the structure has subsided or is otherwise warped.
For example, one wall has partially collapsed into rubble, and has to be
propped up. --1 Safety, --1 Aesthetics; +1 Mu or Pe.

**Empty\***: The lab has a large amount of empty, unused space. A lab
that is much bigger than it needs to be is a disadvantage since it costs
more to maintain the empty space --- it takes more to heat, light, and
clean the chamber. Alternatively, if the empty space is neglected, it
will likely gather dirt and cobwebs, or cause a draft. This Flaw should
be taken for every full two points by which the Size of the lab exceeds
the occupied Size. As soon as the empty space is filled up, this Flaw is
lost. --1 Aesthetics, either +1 Upkeep or --1 Health.

**Low Ceiling\***: The ceiling is lower than the requisite ten feet,
which slightly hampers some magical activities. This Flaw should be
taken twice if the ceiling is less than eight feet, or thrice if the
magus has to stoop (in which case also take --2 Health). --1 General
Quality, ---1 Safety, --1 Aesthetics.

**Subterranean**: The lab is underground. There is a lack of natural
light, and so more candles are required for lighting. +1 Upkeep, --1
Health, --1 Aesthetics; +1 Te.

**Unstable\***: The lab is prone to movements, for example it is on a
ship, is earthquake-prone, or merely has dodgy foundations, which is the
occasional cause of accidents or breakages. This Flaw may be taken more
than once for a greater instability. +1 Upkeep, --1 Safety.

**Flaws (Minor)**

**Cramped**: The lab equipment is packed a little too close together for
comfort, due to lack of space. This slightly hampers all but one type of
lab activity, which is taken as a Specialization. The lab can be
reconfigured to change the Specialization with a season of work. (This
can be done at the same time as working to increase the Refinement.) --1
General Quality, --1 Upkeep, --2 Safety, --1 Aesthetics; 1 point on an
activity Specialization.

**Lesser Focus**: An existing Lesser Feature is the central focus of the
lab, enhancing the Feature, but making activities that do not involve
its use more difficult. --1 General Quality; 2 points among
Specializations provided by the Feature.

**No Stores**: The lab has nowhere to store supplies, and so it cannot
withstand any shortages (in the case of a lack of funds, compulsory
Flaw(s) to reduce the Upkeep are taken immediately, instead of after the
usual two seasons). Vis and dangerous materials cannot be stored very
safely. --2 Safety.

**Flaws (Major)**

**Greater Focus**: An existing Greater Feature is the overwhelming focus
of the lab, enhancing the Feature, but making activities that do not
involve its use more difficult. --2 General Quality; 4 points among
Specializations provided by the Feature.

Outfittings Virtues and Flaws

These Virtues and Flaws are due to the quality and quantity of the
mundane materials and equipment that are in the lab, as well as any
other inhabitants of the lab. Gaining or losing these Virtues and Flaws
thus usually entails the purchase or acquisition of things to put in the
lab, or the lack of (or defects in) such things.

**Virtues (Major)**

**Greater Expansion**: The extent of the lab is greatly increased, with
at least double the usual amount of equipment. This allows it to have
more areas and equipment dedicated to specialized tasks. +2 General
Quality, +4 Upkeep, +1 Aesthetics; 2 points on any Specialization(s).

**Virtues (Minor)**

**Lesser Expansion**: The extent of the lab is increased, with some more
specialized equipment. +1 General Quality, +2 Upkeep; 1 point on any
Specialization.

**Living Quarters**: The lab contains suitable furniture, such as a bed,
a wardrobe, and so on, such that the owner may live and sleep in it.
There is a small benefit to lab work if you live in the lab proper, but
it is not good for your health, and is considered somewhat obsessive. +1
General Quality, --1 Safety, --2 Health, --2 Aesthetics.

**Specimens\***: The lab has a large collection of related things,
stored in visible containers such as jars, or otherwise serving as
objects of study or decoration. +1 Upkeep, +1 Aesthetics; 1 point on any
Form Specialization.

**Virtues (Free)**

**Assistant\***: A Gifted assistant (such as an Hermetic apprentice)
helps out in the lab, affording a bonus to lab work. +(assistant\'s
Intelligence + Magic Theory) General Quality. (This is simply a
restatement of the existing bonuses.)

**Guard\***: A shield grog is on permanent duty at the lab\'s entrance,
and may dissuade unwanted visitors from pestering the magus or
intruding. +1 Aesthetics.

**Highly Organized**: The lab\'s contents have been optimally arranged.
There is a chance to gain this Virtue whenever a season of work is
undertaken to improve the Refinement (see Refinement, above). A season
of such work (with the normal chances of changes to laboratory Virtues
and Flaws) may still be undertaken, even if no improvement to Refinement
is possible. This Virtue is lost if a major accident is suffered, if
someone else uses the lab, or if someone of lower Intelligence helps in
it. +1 General Quality.

**Person\***: There is another person, perhaps a close family member or
a maid, who is to be found very frequently (as a rule of thumb, most
days, for at least an hour) in the lab. This Virtue may be taken once
for each such person who regularly comes in to the lab. Do not count the
owner or any full-time lab assistants, such as an apprentice. A
full-time trained mundane assistant is instead catered for by the
Servant Virtue. --1 Safety; +1 Co or Me.

**Servant**: One of the covenfolk is employed as a full-time lab
servant, to perform the most mundane or bothersome tasks in the lab, and
cater to the needs of the magus. +(servant\'s Intelligence/2, rounding
up) Safety, +1 Aesthetics; +1 Me.

**Spotless**: The lab is impeccably clean. This requires a season of
work to gain. Also, there is a chance to gain this Virtue whenever a
season of work is undertaken to improve the Refinement (see Refinement,
above). This Virtue is lost if cleanliness is not maintained, or after
an accident or neglect is suffered. +1 Health, +1 Aesthetics; +1 Cr.

**Flaws (Free)**

**Basic**: The lab setup is incomplete, and not all the necessary
equipment has been installed. This Flaw is acquired after the first
season of lab construction (see The Standard Hermetic Laboratory,
above). It is removed after the second season of work completes the lab.
--3 General Quality.

**Damaged**: The lab is partially damaged, for example as the result of
a lab accident. It takes one season to repair the damage and lose this
Flaw. --2 General Quality, --1 Safety, --1 Aesthetics.

**Disorganized**: The lab is organized in a rather haphazard or carefree
fashion. Some magi prefer it this way. --1 Safety, --1 Aesthetics; +1 Mu
or Experimentation.

**Hidden Defect\***: A subtle and potentially dangerous error exists in
the lab\'s configuration. This is usually the fault of the owner, but it
may also be caused by a malicious and clever third party. There is a
chance to gain (or lose) this Flaw whenever a season of work is
undertaken to improve the Refinement (see Refinement, above). Whenever
this defect is the cause of a lab botch, make a Perception + Magic
Theory roll against an Ease Factor of 12. If this succeeds, the defect
is spotted and may be corrected with a few hours of work. --3 Safety.

**Missing Ingredients\***: Due to a lack of certain ingredients, lab
work involving either one specific Technique or two specific Forms is
severely hampered --- relevant Lab Totals are halved. For example, the
lab might contain no silver, in which case Terram and Vim Lab Totals are
halved. It does not take a season to remove this Flaw, if sufficient
funds are available to increase the Upkeep. --1 Upkeep.

**Missing Sanctum Marker**: The sanctum marker is not prominently
displayed, and is thus easy to miss, or it is missing altogether.
Hermetic magi might (unwittingly or knowingly) intrude. It does not take
a season to remove this Flaw. --1 Aesthetics.

**Wrecked**: The lab is very heavily damaged, for example as the result
of a major lab accident. It takes two seasons to repair the damage
completely and lose this Flaw. (After one season, it may be replaced by
the Damaged Flaw.) --5 General Quality, --2 Safety, --2 Aesthetics.

**Flaws (Minor)**

**Missing Equipment\***: Due to a lack of certain equipment, lab work in
one or two types of activity is totally impossible. For example, if
there is no desk, parchment, or inks, you cannot work with texts. If you
pick Items, Spells, or Texts, only this one activity cannot be
undertaken. Otherwise, you must pick two of the activity categories (see
the Specialization section above). This Flaw cannot be taken more than
twice. --1 Upkeep.

**Undecorated**: The lab has very spartan decoration, or the decoration
is completely lacking, making the place rather uninspiring and
unwelcoming. --1 Upkeep, --1 Aesthetics; subtract one point from any
Specializations with a score of 2 or more.

**Flaws (Major)**

**Elementary**: This is a cut-down version of a Hermetic laboratory,
with an extremely limited selection of lab equipment installed, so that
only one category of lab activity (see the list of possible activity
Specializations above) is possible at all. The type of activity is
determined at the time of construction, and is fixed thereafter. Still,
such a limited lab is cheaper to maintain and takes only one season to
build completely. It might be suitable for an extremely confined space,
such as in a small cave, or in a wagon. Some covenants build elementary
labs in powerful auras for the purposes of vis extraction. --2 General
Quality, --3 Upkeep.

Supernatural Virtues and Flaws

These Virtues and Flaws are due to supernatural effects, creatures, or
items. The means of gaining or losing these Virtues and Flaws varies
widely --- most cannot be gained by some straightforward effort on the
part of a magus. Some, such as gaining a supernatural guardian, may
require a story or a Hermetic breakthrough. Others, such as the presence
of a vis source in the lab, or a Hermetic predecessor, are generally
choices for the storyguide to make, rather than the player. In the
latter case, the player might not be aware of these Virtues and Flaws
(and thus the complete statistics of the lab).

**Virtues (Major)**

**Greater Guardian**: A powerful supernatural creature (Might 20 or
higher), which is not the familiar of the owner, resides in the lab and
acts as its protector, being well-disposed to the owner. Woe betide any
who should intrude. +(creature\'s Intelligence) Safety, +1 Warping, +1
Aesthetics; 3 points on appropriate Art specialization(s).

**Virtues (Minor)**

**Familiar**: The owner of the lab has a familiar, and the familiar
lives in the lab. Perhaps it even helps with lab work. This Virtue
assumes that the familiar takes up a non-trivial amount of space. If
not, this can be instead taken as a Free Virtue. +(familiar\'s
Intelligence + Magic Theory) General Quality, +(Golden Cord) Safety.
(This is simply a restatement of the existing bonuses.)

**Lesser Guardian**: A supernatural creature (less than Might 20), which
is not the familiar of the owner, resides in the lab and acts as its
protector, being well-disposed to the owner. +1 Safety; 1 point on an
appropriate Art specialization.

**Vis Source\***: A naturally-occurring source of vis is to be found in
the lab. --1 Safety, +1 Warping; 2 points on the appropriate Art
Specialization.

**Virtues (Free)**

**Enchantment\***: The lab itself has been enchanted as a magic item.
This may grant Virtues or Flaws, alter Characteristics, or add to
Specializations (see the guidelines later).

**Inexhaustible Supplies**: The lab is blessed with magically
replenishing ingredients and consumables which never run out. --3
Upkeep, +1 Warping.

**Magic Item\***: A magic item is installed in the lab. It might be
self-made, donated, purchased, or perhaps some kind of artifact which
was found in the lab. If the item is very large, taking up a significant
amount of space in the lab, then it should be treated as a Minor Virtue
instead of a Free Virtue. This may grant Virtues or Flaws, alter
Characteristics, or add to Specializations (see the guidelines later).

**Regio\***: The interior of the lab is in a regio, and there is an
another regio level, which the owner can navigate easily. If there are
further regio levels, this Virtue may be taken more than once. +3 Size,
+1 Warping.

**Flaws (Free)**

**Abyss**: The lab contains some kind of magical void, such as a
bottomless well. This may be made into a Void Feature (purchased as
usual). --2 Safety; +2 Pe.

**Haunted**: The lab is home to a haunting spirit, who occasionally
disturbs the current owner. +1 Warping, --1 Aesthetics; +2 Me.

**Impregnable**: The lab is completely inaccessible, except through
reasonably powerful magic. For example, it is blocked off by a stone
wall and requires a Muto Terram spell to access. While the owner is much
less likely to be disturbed, fewer people will ever get to see the lab,
or they may assume that the owner is rather paranoid. --2 Aesthetics.

**Inhabitants**: Residency in the lab is shared with some other
creatures, who consider the place as their home, not a lab. They may
provide a nuisance to the owner, and vice-versa. --1 Safety, --1
Aesthetics; 1 point on an appropriate Art Specialization.

**Predecessor**: The lab retains some foibles due to its (notable)
previous owner. --1 Safety, +1 Warping; +1 Experimentation.

**Restriction**: The lab might forbid certain activities (one category
of lab activity cannot be performed), or otherwise tiresome or expensive
rituals or practices are required in order to perform lab work. --1
General Quality or +2 Upkeep as appropriate.

**Flaws (Minor)**

**Lesser Illusion\***: One of the seeming merits of the lab is but an
illusion. You should take one Minor Virtue immediately (there is no time
cost) to balance this Flaw, but note that it is illusory and its effects
are negated completely. For example, the lab may appear to be hung with
fine tapestries, but which do not really exist. In this case, take the
Superior Decoration Virtue, but do not apply its modifications to the
lab\'s statistics. +1 Warping, +1 Aesthetics; +1 Im.

**Lightless**: The lab is totally dark and its contents cannot be seen.
The owner must devise some other means of spatial perception in order to
work normally. --1 Upkeep, +1 Warping, the Aesthetics score cannot
exceed --1; +1 Pe or Im.

**Flaws (Major)**

**Greater Illusion\***: One of the major parts or aspects of the lab is
but an illusion. You should take one Major Virtue immediately (there is
no time cost) to balance this Flaw, but note that it is illusory and its
effects are negated completely. For example, the lab may appear to be
twice as large as it really is. In this case, take the Greater Expansion
Virtue, but do not apply its modifications to the lab\'s statistics. +2
Warping, +2 Aesthetics; +2 Im.

Laboratory Features

Specialized labs often have certain noteworthy or unique structural
features (one or more Greater Feature or Lesser Feature Virtues), which
aid or inspire certain types of magic. Features may be added to a lab
with relatively little disruption, if space permits. Alternatively, the
lab may be rearranged such that one Feature becomes the lab\'s central
focus (in which case, take the Greater Focus or Lesser Focus Flaw, as
appropriate). A lab may only have one Focus. In this case, lab
activities which are unrelated to the Feature are disadvantaged, but the
specialized benefits of the Feature are increased. In either case, it
takes one or two seasons to build or assemble the structure, for a
Lesser Feature or Greater Feature, respectively.

Below are listed some example Features, together with the possible
Specializations for each. Many labs have a number of these things, but
they do not necessarily count as a Feature, unless purchased with either
the Greater Feature or Lesser Feature Virtue. The former provides three
points on Specialization(s), the latter one point. You may choose to
distribute these points amongst the listed Specializations as you wish.
You should feel free to come up with your own ideas for Features, since
just about anything that may be found in a Hermetic laboratory may be
made into a Feature.

**Altar**: An ornamental place of ritual worship, such as a raised dais.
Specializations: any Technique, Vi.

**Animal Pen**: An enclosure for one or more animals, often a familiar,
to dwell. Specializations: Familiar, An.

**Antechamber**: A separate enclosure or compartment. Spells may be cast
here in a more secure environment. Specializations: Experimentation,
Spells, Re.

**Astronomical Device**: A sophisticated tool for measuring the
movements of the heavens, often placed near a window or skylight. The
most common such item is an astrolabe; and example of a more advanced
device is the armillary sphere. Specializations: In, Vi.

**Balance**: An exact weighing device, such as a pair of scales.
Specializations: Vis Extraction, In, Re.

**Balcony**: An outdoors balcony, where the magus may cast spells into
the open air. Specializations: Spells, Au.

**Cage**: A large cage, usually built of sturdy metal bars, for
imprisoning or immobilizing a subject. Specializations: Pe, Re, Co, An.

**Cauldron**: A heavy copper or brass cauldron, for the heating and
mixing of large quantities of ingredients. Specializations:
Experimentation, Longevity Rituals, Vis Extraction, Mu, Aq, He, Ig.

**Desk**: A comfortable and stout table, designed for reading and
scribing. Specializations: Texts, In.

**Fireplace**: A stone enclosure, where fuel is burnt for heating, but
where substances may also be heated or immolated. Specializations: Pe,
Ig, Im.

**Forge**: A furnace --- a more tightly enclosed and robust fireplace
often operated by bellows, which yields heat sufficient for the smelting
of metals --- accompanied by an anvil and smithy. Specializations:
Items, Ig, Te.

**Grave**: The burial place of one or more corpses. This may be either a
simple earthen grave or something more elaborate, such as a stone
sarcophagus. Specializations: Pe, Co.

**Lofty Ceiling**: A light, airy space overhead, for which a tall
chamber, perhaps with a vaulted ceiling, is required. Specializations:
Au.

**Loom**: A large wooden apparatus for the weaving of threads into a
fabric. Specializations: Re, He.

**Map**: An elaborate and detailed plan or model, accurately
illustrating surrounding lands or buildings, perhaps. Specializations:
In, Te.

**Mechanism**: Any kind of large mechanical device, consisting of many
moving parts such as cogs and wheels, used for the basic automation of
one or more tasks. Specializations: Vis Extraction, Re.

**Mirror**: A grand and ornamental silvered mirror, or other reflective
surface. Specializations: In, Im, Me.

**Monolith**: A huge slab of primal rock, possibly carved with mystical
symbols. Specializations: Te, Vi.

**Orb**: A smooth sphere of precious stone, possibly opaque or
semi-opaque, used in conjunction with divinatory effects.
Specializations: In, Im, Me, Vi.

**Pallet**: A bed upon which a patient may be treated or examined,
perhaps equipped with some surgeon\'s tools. Specializations: Longevity
Rituals, Cr, Co.

**Pit**: A deep hole dug in the floor. Things placed inside it cannot
easily get out. Specializations: Pe, Te.

**Pool**: A still body of water, or a well. It may be used when scrying.
Specializations: In, Aq.

**Portal**: A gateway, through which things may be summoned or sent
away. Specializations: Cr, Re.

**Rack**: A rather unpleasant large mechanical construct, used for
torturing persons placed inside it. Specializations: Pe, Co, Me.

**Running Water**: Any kind of water which runs through or around the
lab, such as a stream or fountain. Specializations: Items, Aq.

**Summoning Circle**: An elaborate pentagram marked on the floor, into
which things are summoned. Specializations: Experimentation, Spells, Cr,
Re, An, Vi.

**Statue**: A carved semblance of some person, creature, or thing,
usually made of stone, metal, or porcelain. Specializations: Re, An, Co,
Te.

**Still**: A network of glass or metal tubing connecting delicate
containers, such as retorts, designed for the distillation and
refinement of compounds. Specializations: Vis Extraction, Mu, Re, Aq.

**Tablet**: A large framed slab of wax, for temporary scribing with a
stylus. Specializations: Texts, In, Im.

**Tank**: A bulky container for storing fluids. Specializations: Vis
Extraction, Re, Aq.

**Throne**: An opulent and raised seat for a ruler (or at least, the
self-important) to sit in. Specializations: Teaching, Re, Me.

**Tree**: A live tree or a large plant, such as a vine. Specializations:
Cr, He.

**Void**: A shaft, hole, or opening. Specializations: In, Pe, Au.

**Wall**: A large blank wall, onto which images may be summoned.
Specializations: In, Im.

**Wheel**: A wheel powered by water, wind, horse, slaves, or magic.
Specializations: Items, Re.

**Window**: A portal to the outside world, which lets in the sun, moon,
and stars. Specializations: In, Au, Im.

Magic Items for Laboratories

A magic item designed for lab use (or an enchantment on the whole lab
itself) can grant one or more Virtues or Flaws, or add to the
Characteristics or Specializations of the lab. A magic item may be made
into a Feature, in which case that Virtue should be paid for as usual.
Equally, an existing Feature may be enchanted as a magic item. In this
case, if the Shape and Material bonus(es) of the Feature are not listed
elsewhere, you may assume it to have Shape and Material Bonuses equal to
its points of Arts Specializations provided.

Specific effects for each item should be created as normal. If an effect
cannot be conceived of which yields the desired benefit, then it is
probably not possible. To provide a benefit, an effect must also be new
to the laboratory, and not duplicate any existing effects. For example,
if the lab already has a set of enchanted lanterns which grant the
Magical Lighting Virtue, then adding more lanterns is not really going
to help. For each effect, there are two possible ways to determine the
appropriate modifications to the lab\'s statistics:

If the effect duplicates an existing Laboratory Virtue or Flaw, then the
item simply grants that Virtue or Flaw to the lab. It is gained
immediately and has no space cost; apply its stated modifications to
Characteristics or Specializations, as usual.

If the effect does not resemble a Laboratory Virtue or Flaw, then the
final level of the effect determines how many points of Characteristics
or Specializations may be gained. Every ten levels may grant one point
in a Specialization, or every 20 levels may improve a Characteristic by
one point. For example, an effect with a final level of 50 might improve
one Characteristic by one point (20 levels), and one Specialization by
three points (30 levels). Also, items or enchantments with powerful
effects, influencing the whole of the lab, may (unintentionally)
increase the Warping Characteristic, at the discretion of the
storyguide.
