Spells

The Order of Hermes has collected and created hundreds of spells that
have been passed down to apprentices and traded among magi for
centuries. Those listed here are representative of the most useful,
interesting, and exemplary of those spells --- in no way are the spells
listed here a definitive list of those available, and more examples can
be found throughout the supplements, particularly in *Magi of Hermes*.
Instead, they should be used as examples so that you may invent spells
of your own. Many of these spells serve as good examples for creating
other, similar spells. For instance, a spell to turn you into a wolf can
be used as a model for a spell to turn you into another animal.

Levels

The level of a spell is a measure of the amount of magical power needed
to create the spell effect. The higher the level of the spell, the less
of a magus\'s power is left over for breaking through Magic Resistance.
It is made up of the base level of the spell, as determined by the
guideline for the effect of the spell, plus adjustments for changes in
Range, Duration, Target, and size.

Magnitudes

The magnitude of a spell is equal to one fifth of its level, rounded up.
This is also the number of pawns of vis needed to cast a ritual spell,
and changing the Range, Duration, or Target of a spell generally changes
its level by one magnitude (five levels) at a time.

Spells of level one to five are all first magnitude, although the rules
for changing Ranges, Durations, and Targets work differently for such
spells (see below, page @@).

**Spell Magnitude: Level/5 (rounded up)**

Spell Design

The Central Rule

The troupe may always intervene and declare that a certain combination
of Range, Duration, Target, and effect warrants a higher or lower level
than that described by the guidelines and the system below. The range of
effects possible in **Ars Magica** is so large that any system is bound
to allow some effects that strike a given troupe as too hard or too easy
(different effects for different troupes). The system gives sensible
levels in the vast majority of cases, but storyguides should not let
players use the system to force things past common sense.

Level Guidelines

This chapter contains a selection of example spells, and guidelines for
what can be achieved with a Formulaic or Spontaneous spell of a given
level. For the guidelines, the range of the spell is Personal, the
duration is Momentary, and the target is Individual. These are the
lowest members of their classes, so that the given level is the lowest
level at which a Ritual, Formulaic or Spontaneous spell can have that
effect.

**Spell Guidelines: Range: Personal; Duration: Momentary; Target:
Individual**

Ranges, Durations, Targets

The Range, Duration, and Target of a spell determine what it can affect.
The Range governs how far the target can be from the magus, the Duration
determines how long the target will be affected, and the Target
describes what the spell can affect. Each parameter has a number of
possible ratings, which can be arranged in order from least difficult to
produce to most difficult to produce. This is done in the chart below.
Parameters which are listed together below but are separated by a slash
(like Touch/Eye) represent different actual ranges that share the same
level of difficulty. They are not interchangeable, simply equally
difficult.

Each category of Range, Duration, and Target is described below. The
categories described here were built into the structure of Hermetic
magic by Bonisagus. All Spontaneous spells must conform to these
requirements (the magus is making the spell up on the fly---he cannot
also push the limits of magic theory). Formulaic or Ritual spells, on
the other hand, can be invented with Ranges, Durations or Targets that
are not listed here. This is usually slightly more difficult than if the
closest category were used, but is largely left to troupe
interpretation.

Changing Ranges, Durations, and Targets

To calculate the level for a spell that does not use the base Range,
Duration, and Target, add one magnitude (five levels) to the level of
the spell for every step by which the parameter is raised. It is also
possible to calculate levels based on an existing spell, with different
Range, Duration, and Target. In that case, increasing them works in the
same way, and for every step by which one is lowered, subtract one
magnitude (five levels).

Below level 5, adding a magnitude only adds one level, and subtracting a
magnitude only subtracts one level. Thus, one magnitude lower than level
5 is level 4, and one magnitude higher than level 2 is level 3.

For example, consider a level 15 spell with Range Voice, Duration Sun,
and Target Group. A variant with the same effect but with Range Sight,
Duration Moon, and Target Room would be level 25 (+1 magnitude to
increase Range Voice to Sight, +1 magnitude to increase Duration Sun to
Moon, and no change for changing the Target Group to Room, because they
are at the same level). A different variant with Range Personal,
Duration Concentration, and Target Individual would be level 2 (--2
magnitudes to decrease Range Voice to Personal, --1 magnitude to
decrease Duration Sun to Concentration, and --2 magnitudes to decrease
Target Group to Individual). Note that since --2 magnitudes takes the
level from 15 to 5, the additional magnitudes of reduction only lower
the level by --1 per magnitude.

Ranges, Durations, and Targets

**Additional Magnitudes Range Duration Object Container Sense**

0 Personal Momentary Individual Circle Taste

1 Touch/Eye Concentration/Diameter Part -- Touch

2 Voice Sun/Ring Group Room Smell

3 Sight Moon -- Structure Hearing

4 Arcane Connection Year -- Boundary Vision

Ranges

The range of a spell is the distance to the nearest part of the target
of the spell. Thus, if the caster is touching the external wall of a
room, he can cast a Target Room Corpus spell on the people within at
Touch Range, even though he is not touching any of those people, and
indeed cannot see them. The target of the spell is the room, and thus
the spell does not violate the Limit of Arcane Connections.

A spell that has a continuing effect remains in effect even if the
caster moves out of range. A spell that allows the caster to control the
effect only permits that control as long as the caster is within range.
However, it does not expire if the caster moves out of range, and he may
control it again if he moves back into range.

**Personal:** The spell only affects the caster, defined in the same way
as an Individual Target. Personal Range spells can never have a
container Target (such as Circle, Room, or Structure). This adds no
magnitudes to the guideline.

**Touch/Eye:** Touch: The magus or anything he touches, whether a person
or thing. This adds 1 magnitude to the guideline.

Eye: The magus may target any person or creature that he has established
eye contact with. A human being who knows of no reason to avoid eye
contact makes it automatically if dealing with the magus in a social
setting. The Gift does *not* make people avoid eye contact. It is
impossible to make eye contact with an unwilling human without getting
at least two people to hold the victim down. It is effectively
impossible to make eye contact with an enemy in combat; they aren\'t
looking at your eyes. It typically takes a combat round to establish eye
contact with a calm animal, before the magus can start casting the
spell. This adds 1 magnitude to the guideline. (Touch and Eye are the
same \"level\" of range.)

**Voice:** Anything to which the magus\'s voice carries. Typically, firm
words carry about 15 paces, while quite words are audible within 5 paces
and a shout carries about 50. Magical enhancement of the voice does not
increase this range, and a spell cast silently at this range can affect
only the caster. The range of Ritual and ceremonial spells with Voice
Range is ut 50 paces, because the process of casting involves a loud
voice at some point. Non-human casters, including Bjornaer in Heartbeast
form, may have different ranges for their voice. Magical shapeshifting
falls under magical enhancement of the voice, however. The range is
based on the distance that the caster\'s voice carries, not on whether
the target can hear it. Deaf targets, stones, targets in a noisy
environment, and targets under the influence of PeIm spells that stop
sounds from reaching them can all be affected at the normal range.
However, if the caster is silenced or quietened by magic, the range is
reduced. Such a spell must penetrate the caster\'s Magic Resistance.
Magic items use the wielder\'s voice; independent items need to be given
a voice (CrIm) to use this range. The range is established when the
spell is cast, and remains the same even if the magus changes the
loudness of his voice. Thus, a Voice range spell can allow silent
control, but only as long as the target is within the distance that the
magus\'s voice carried when he cast the spell. This adds 2 magnitudes to
the guideline.

**Sight:** Anything that the magus can see. If the magus is standing on
the highest point for miles, this range can be immense. A blind magus
can only affect himself. A magic item uses the wielder\'s sight;
independent items need to be able to see (InIm) to use this range. This
adds 3 magnitudes to the guideline.

**Arcane Connection:** Anything that the magus has an Arcane Connection
to. Distance is immaterial unless the storyguide chooses to impose some
limit. Such limits are usually provided in the example spells. Note that
while Arcane Connection is a range, it is different from a physical item
that is an Arcane Connection. This distinction is important, because
some spells require that the caster have an Arcane Connection, but the
spell must be cast as some range other than Arcane Connection. This adds
4 magnitudes to the guideline.

Durations

If a spell with a momentary effect, such as healing a wound, creating a
fire, or opening a pit, is cast with a longer duration, it generally
sustains that effect for the duration, rather than having its effect
multiple times within the duration. Thus, a wound healed with duration
Sun stays healed for that length of time, and reappears at the end. The
target can still take other wounds. A fire created with duration
Diameter burns for two minutes, and may inflict damage every round over
that period. A pit opened for duration Moon with a Perdo Terram spell
cannot be filled in with earth for that period; any more earth dumped in
it is destroyed as well. Wood, animal products, or water could fill it,
though, as they are not of the same Form as the spell. The destroyed
earth still does not reappear at the expiration of the spell.

A magus can recast a spell with Diameter, Sun, Moon, or Year Duration at
the end of its period, so that the effect is continuous, and does not
briefly disappear between the two castings. The magus recasting the
spell does not have to be the same person who case the original spell,
and it does not even have to be the same spell, although for a lot of
spells an overlap will not make much difference. (This is important, for
example, if a covenant casts a higher-level version of *Aegis of the
Hearth* one year.) No roll is required to achieve this, but distracting
events may prevent it. The critical period is about a Diameter for Sun,
Moon, or Year spells, and any distraction that interrupts the recasting
of the spell is enough to guarantee at least a short break for Diameter
spells. For Ritual spells, it is easy for magi to determine when they
must start casting to avoid a break, as such calculations are covered by
Artes Liberales and Philosophiae, but if the Ritual is interrupted and
must be restarted, there will not be enough time to restart that Ritual
and cast it before the older spell ends.

**Momentary:** The spell lasts but a moment and then dissipates. In many
cases the effects of the spell will endure long after the spell itself
finishes. For example, a Rego spell that moves a rock from the bottom of
the hill to the top might have Momentary duration, but the rock stays at
the top of the hill. Similar considerations apply to most Perdo spells;
the magic lasts but a moment, but the target stays destroyed. This adds
no magnitudes to the guideline.

While a moment is a very short period of time, it may be rather more
than an instant. It could be as long as a combat round (six seconds) for
some spells, and maybe even very slightly longer, although that would be
unusual. A single spell effect happens, over a short period of time, and
then the spell stops.

Ritual Creo spells with Momentary Duration create things that last as
any other thing of that type. The magic is gone in a moment and so
cannot be dispelled. This also applies to Ritual healing spells. Note
that unnatural things do not naturally last for any time at all, and so
only last as long as the spell does, even when created with a Ritual. (A
Creo spell to create such a thing would need a Muto requisite.)

**Concentration/Diameter:** Concentration: The spell lasts as long as
the magus concentrates. In the absence of distractions, assume that a
magus can concentrate for fifteen minutes per point of Concentration
ability. If there are distractions, see the rules in the Hermetic Magic
chapter, page @@. This adds 1 magnitude to the guideline.

Diameter: The spell lasts for the time that the sun takes to move its
diameter in the sky --- almost exactly two minutes (twenty combat
rounds). (Diameter and Concentration are the same \"level\" of
duration.) This adds 1 magnitude to the guideline.

**Sun/Ring:** Sun: The spell lasts until the sun next rises or sets.
This adds 2 magnitudes to the guideline.

Ring: The spell lasts until the target of the spell, or part of the
target, moves outside a ring drawn at the time of casting, or until the
ring is physically broken. This adds 2 magnitudes to the guideline.

A ring must actually be drawn while the spell is being cast. The magus
may use magic to do so, but that magic must not have a range greater
than Touch, and the magus must physically trace out the ring. The magus
may not move more quickly than ten paces per round (five feet per
second) while doing this. The casting of a non-Ritual spell may be
extended out to allow the drawing of a large ring. However, the caster
must make Int + Concentration rolls of 6+ every round to maintain
concentration on the spell, and if someone breaks the ring at any point
before it is completed, the spell automatically botches. Really large
rings are unlikely to be worth the risk.

The ring may already exist, for example as a band laid into the ground.
In this case, the magus must trace the full circumference of the ring,
moving no more quickly than ten paces per round.

**Moon:** The spell lasts until both the new and full moon have set.
This adds 3 magnitudes to the guideline.

**Year:** The spell lasts until sunrise on the fourth equinox or
solstice after its casting. A spell with this duration must be ritual.
This adds 4 magnitudes to the guideline.

Target

There are three types of target: objects, containers, and senses. A
spell cast on an object Target affects the things in that Target for the
duration of the spell, even if they change so that they would no longer
qualify as a valid target for the original spell. If the caster is
within range, she retains control of the spell, if the spell allows such
control. Container targets are more complex, as described in the nearby
insert.

**Individual/Circle:** Individual: The spell can affect a single
discrete thing, such as one person or one object. A huge boulder is a
discrete object, a mountain is not (because it is joined to the ground).
Clothes on a person or moss on a boulder are part of the person or
boulder for these purposes. Individual is an object Target. This adds no
magnitudes to the guideline.

Circle: The spell affects everything within a circle drawn by the magus
at the time of casting, and ends if the circle is broken, even if that
is before the duration of the spell expires. The spell also ends when
its duration ends. See Ring, above, for restrictions on drawing the
circle. One circle may serve to underwrite both Ring Duration and Circle
Target. Circle is a container Target. This adds no magnitudes to the
guideline.

Individual and Circle are the same level of effect.

**Part:** The spell can affect a part of a discrete thing, such as a
person\'s arm or a section of the ground. This target refers to spatial
parts, parts that you could, at least in theory, cut off and put in a
bag. A person\'s mind is not a part of him in this sense, nor is his
sense of humor. His heart, however, is. Something is only a Part target
while it is actually a part of something else; things, like severed
arms, that used to be part of something, or, like bricks, which could
become part of something, are Individual targets as long as they are not
currently part of something else. Part is harder than Individual because
whole things are metaphysically important. It is easier to affect a
thing as a whole than to affect a part of it. Part is an object Target.
This adds 1 magnitude to the guideline.

**Group/Room:** Group: The spell can affect a group of people or things.
The components of the group must be close together in space, and the
group itself must be separated from any other things of the same type.
Three grogs huddled together or a ring of standing stones are a group:
six people out of a crowd are usually not. The things in the Group when
the spell is cast are affected for the entire duration, even if they
split up. Things that join the Group during the spell duration are not
affected. It is possible to target a \'Group\' with a single member,
although an Individual target will always be lower level. Group is an
object Target. This adds 2 magnitudes to the guideline.

Room: The spell affects everything within a chamber. The interior
surfaces of the walls of the room are within the Target, but their
exterior surfaces are not. This room can be very large (the nave of a
cathedral, for instance, or a natural cave), but it must be enclosed and
have definite boundaries. A courtyard would often count, a valley would
not. A spell with Target Room is useless if there is no Room containing
the targets; it cannot affect a \'roughly room-sized volume\' in open
space. Room is a container Target. This adds 2 magnitudes to the
guideline.

Group and Room are the same level of effect.

**Structure:** The spell affects everything within a single structure.
The structure itself counts as within the structure for these purposes,
as the limit is the outer edge of any walls. The structure can range in
size from a hut to a castle keep, but it must be a single, linked
complex. As a rule of thumb, if it is all covered by one roof, it is one
structure, but troupe discretion applies. As with Room, target Structure
is no use if there is no pre-existing structure bounding the target.
Structure is a container Target. This adds 3 magnitudes to the
guideline.

**Boundary:** The spell affects everything within a well-defined natural
or man-made boundary. This could be the wall of a city, the edge of a
village, the shores of a lake, the edge of a forest, or the bottom of a
mountain. Since the ocean is not obviously bounded, it cannot be
affected in this way. As with Room and Structure, there must actually be
a boundary for this target to be useful. It cannot be used to simply
affect a really big area. A spell with this target must be a Ritual.
Boundary is a container Target. This adds 4 magnitudes to the guideline.

Magical Senses

Intellego spells can grant magical senses to a person. These spells
allow the recipient to detect things that he could not normally sense,
and they have different targets, corresponding to the kind of sense that
the recipient gets. The range of the spell is the range to the
recipient.

It is possible to grant magical senses to many people at once, but this
requires Muto Mentem magic, with Intellego Form requisites.

Each magical sense Target grants the recipient information through one
of his senses. This information is easily distinguished from mundane
information coming through the same sense, but it is subject to the same
limitations as the mundane sense. Thus, a magical sense that works with
the sense of smell is very bad at giving direction, and can be avoided
by staying upwind of the sensor, while a magical sense that works with
vision is no good in the dark.

Magical senses must penetrate the Magic Resistance of creatures sensed,
as well as the Magic Resistance (if any) of the person granted the
sense. Thus, the Penetration of a magical sense should be recorded for
future reference. The mundane sense through which the magical sense
grants information does not need to penetrate Magic Resistance.

A single spell grants a single magical sense. To gain several magical
senses, you must cast several spells.

**Taste:** The information comes through the sense of taste. This target
is equal in level to Individual, and adds no magnitudes to the
guideline.

**Touch:** The information comes through the sense of touch. This target
is equal in level to Part, and adds 1 magnitude to the guideline.

**Smell:** The information comes through the sense of smell. This target
is equal in level to Group, and adds 2 magnitudes to the guideline.

**Hearing:** The information comes through the sense of hearing. This
target is equal in level to Structure, and adds 3 magnitudes to the
guideline.

**Vision:** The information comes through the sense of sight. This
target is equal in level to Boundary, but, unlike Boundary, it does not
require Ritual magic. It adds 4 magnitudes to the guideline.

Magical Wards

Rego spells can create wards which protect the target from things of the
appropriate Form. These use the normal targets, but the target is the
thing protected, rather than the things warded against, and the range is
the range to the target, not to the things warded against.

Wards with a Circle target are of particular note. They prevent things
warded against that are within the circle from leaving, and prevent
things warded against that are outside from entering. Warded things
cannot act across the circle, no matter which side they are on, nor can
they damage the circle, directly or indirectly. It is quite common to
create such spells with a duration of Ring, as then the ward can be made
to last indefinitely, with care. Such wards target the circle itself,
which cannot leave the circle, and thus last as long as the circle does.
However, this is not required, and the spell can be created with any
Duration.

The spell guidelines for wards against magical things are listed with a
base range of Touch, base duration of Ring, and base target of Circle,
because a ward with these parameters wards against creatures with a
Might equal to or less than or equal to its level. The parameters of the
spell can be changed in the normal way, so that a ward which only
protected the magus (Range Personal, Target Individual) for a duration
of Moon would have the same final level.

Like any Hermetic spell, wards must Penetrate Magic Resistance to have
their effect. A spell like *Circular Ward Against Demons* is much harder
to cast at high levels, since the spell level must equal or exceed any
affected demon\'s Might Score, and the Penetration Total must exceed it.
For this reason, magi rarely learn or cast versions of these spells more
powerful than about Level 30, instead favoring Rego spells of lower
levels that hinder the target\'s movements more directly. Since in most
cases Hermetic wards do not actually target the creatures affected by
them, most magi cannot boost their Penetration Total with an Arcane
Connection to a supernatural being, unless that being is inside the
circle when the ward is cast.

Magical Craft

Hermetic magic can create a wide range of things. Natural objects, such
as boulders, plants, or animals, can be created with Creo magic. Unless
the caster botches the spell, the result is always a good example of
that sort of thing. The caster may make an Intelligence + Finesse roll
to add or control details, such as the shape of a tree's branches or the
color of an animal's fur, within the normal range for such things. A
failure on the Finesse roll just means that the caster does not get the
desired details; the created thing is still a good example of the sort
of thing it is. Even a botch on the Finesse roll does not make the
creation a bad example of what it is, but it does create something as
far from the caster's desire as possible. If she was trying to create a
tree to block a hole in a wall, for example, a botched Finesse roll
might mean that the tree makes more of the wall collapse, making the
hole even larger and easier to get through. The tree, however, is still
a perfectly good tree.

Artificial items, such as tables, robes, and buildings, are a bit more
complex. They can be created from nothing, using Creo magic, or from raw
materials, using Rego magic. The advantage of working with natural raw
materials is that a Momentary spell creates a lasting item: the changes
are made in a moment, but the raw materials do not change back when the
spell expires. An item made with Creo only lasts for the duration of the
spell, unless the spell was a Momentary Ritual.

Rego magic is the most straightforward. The spell rearranges the target
materials in the same way as a craftsman, making a new item. Nothing is
created or destroyed (without appropriate requisites), and the final
product must be stable by itself. A single spell has a single effect,
such as turning iron ore into finished iron ingots and slag, and does
not need any tools that are not incorporated into the final product. The
target of the spell is the raw materials, which means that it normally
has to be Group; there are exceptions, such as a spell to create a
sculpture from a block of stone. The caster must adapt the spell to the
materials on hand in every case, which requires a Perception + Finesse
roll. The base Ease Factor for this roll is 3 greater than the Ease
Factor for a mundane craftsman carrying out the same task. If the spell
covers more than one mundane task, use the highest mundane Ease Factor
to calculate the base. This is also modified by the length of time the
task would normally take. The base Ease Factor covers up to one day's
work for one craftsman, but longer periods of work increase the Ease
Factor. This can represent one craftsman working for longer, or many
craftsmen working at the same time.

**Rego Craft Magic Roll: Perception + Finesse**

**Base Ease Factor: Highest Ease Factor for a Mundane Craftsman + 3**

**One day's work for one craftsman: +0**

**One month's work for one craftsman: +3**

**One season's work for one craftsman: +6**

**One year's work for one craftsman: +9**

One month's work for one craftsman is equivalent to thirty craftsmen all
working for a single day, or two working for about two weeks, and so on.
It is possible to create a spell that turns iron ore that is still in
the ground into finished swords, but that would be at least a season's
worth of work by various craftsmen, and thus would have a high Ease
Factor.

If the Finesse roll fails, the materials are still rearranged, but not
into anything useful. The remaining pieces may well be too small to
repeat the spell, but that is up to the troupe to decide. On a botch,
the result normally looks right, but has a hidden and fatal flaw.

Creo craft magic is a little more involved. A spell creates a
functioning version of whatever is intended, just as for natural
objects. This is equivalent to a work of craft with an Ease Factor of 6.
However, if the caster relies on this and does not make a Finesse roll,
they have no control over the details. A Spontaneous spell creates a
random instance of the sort of thing, which means that clothes, for
example, may well not fit the intended target. A Formulaic or Ritual
spell creates exactly the same thing every time.

When casting a Spontaneous spell, the caster may choose to make an
Intelligence + Finesse roll to define the details. The most basic
details have an Ease Factor of 0, for example to fix the approximate
size of clothes. Fixing two or three basic details, or making more
specific changes, has an Ease Factor of 3. If the specification is quite
elaborate, use the same Ease Factors as for Rego craft magic.

A Formulaic or Ritual spell can be designed to allow the caster to make
certain changes to the product, although this normally adds magnitudes
to the spell level to account for the complexity. For example,
*Conjuring the Mystic Tower* allows the caster to determine the layout
of chambers within the tower. Simple decisions have an Ease Factor of 0,
while more complex ones have higher Ease Factors. Splitting each floor
of the mystic tower in two would have an Ease Factor of 0, but creating
elaborate mazes would have a much higher Ease Factor, possibly 12. The
caster can only change the elements that the spell design allows for;
the caster cannot change the height or diameter of the mystic tower, for
example.

A Finesse roll also allows the caster to create higher quality items,
using the same Ease Factors as for Rego craft magic. A Formulaic or
Ritual spell may be designed to allow for this, but this should add at
least three magnitudes to the base level, as it creates a lot of
flexibility.

**Creo Craft Magic Roll: Intelligence + Finesse**

**Fix a Single Property: Ease Factor 0**

**Fix Two or Three Properties, or Fix One Precisely: Ease Factor 3**

**Elaborate Modifications: Same Ease Factor as Rego Craft Magic**

Botching the Finesse roll for Creo craft magic creates something that
hinders the caster, and it might be so badly designed that most people
would have trouble saying what it was supposed to be.

No matter how much flexibility is added to a Formulaic or Ritual spell,
it can still only create one type of thing, such as a sword or a stone
tower.

Note that Rego craft magic uses Perception + Finesse, while Creo craft
magic uses Intelligence + Finesse. This is because Rego craft magic must
work with existing materials, which means that the caster must be
sensitive to their properties. Creo craft magic, in contrast, creates
its own materials, which means that the caster must understand how the
materials need to be to achieve the desired result.

More details about crafting with magic can be found in *Covenants,* page
49, and *Houses of Hermes: Societates,* pages 60--62.

Ease Factors for Creating and Crafting Objects

The Ease Factors in the table below include the +3 adjustment for magic
use, and assume that a mundane craftsman could complete the work in no
more than a day. *City and Guild* contains more extensive rules for
mundane craft (Chapter 4), and *Art and Academe* contains more rules for
art (Chapter 8), which can be used to set more precise Ease Factors if
the troupe desires. If you are using Workshop Totals from *City and
Guild,* generate the equivalent Finesse Ease Factor by adding 3 to the
Workshop Total, and then any modifiers for extra time required.

Crafting Task Ease Factor

Trivial 3 Almost never worth rolling for

Simple 6 Work regularly done by untrained people, like whitewashing a
house

Easy 9 The daily work of semiskilled craftsmen

Average 12 The daily work of skilled craftsmen

Hard 15 Daily work of highly skilled craftsmen, exceptional work by
average craftsmen

Very Hard 18 Daily work of exceptionally skilled craftsmen, exceptional
work by highly skilled craftsmen

Impressive 21 Exceptional work done by grandmasters of a craft

Remarkable 24 The finest work done by grandmasters of a craft

Almost impossible 27 The epitomes of skill in a craft

Summoning Spirits

Hermetic magic is capable of summoning spirits. Such magic brings the
spirit instantly to the caster, but does not grant any control --- other
magic may be used for those purposes, and a spirit may be summoned
directly into a ward cast by the summoner. (Wards cast by anyone else
affect the spirit as normal, and may keep the spirit out if it is not
powerful enough to cross the ward.) Summoning spells are normally cast
at Arcane Connection range, making them quite high level.

If the target spirit is in Mythic Europe, a Formulaic (or Spontaneous)
spell is sufficient. If the spirit is in another realm, such as the
Magic Realm, Arcadia, Purgatory, or Hell, the spell must be a Ritual.
(The Limit of the Divine, and possibly the Limit of the Lunar Sphere,
puts Heaven out of reach.) Regiones count as part of Mythic Europe for
these purposes, and it is important to note that a lot of spirits,
including demons, spend most of their time in Mythic Europe.

Targets and Creo

The target of a Creo spell that actually creates something is the thing
created. The Target is thus always Individual or Group. A spell to
create a part of something is either a healing spell or a Muto spell,
depending on the part created. A Creo spell with Target Room cannot be
used to fill a room with something. Instead, use Target Group with an
appropriate size modifier.

The Creo guidelines for each Form give the level required to create
different kinds of thing. The size is determined using the standard
rules for target sizes.

Container Targets

Spells with \"container\" Targets, including Circle, Room, Structure,
and Boundary, raise a number of specific issues.

**Static and Dynamic Targets**

Spells with \"container\" Targets, including Circle, Room, Structure,
and Boundary, can work in one of two ways.

First, they can affect any valid target within the Target container at
the time of casting, and continue to affect those targets even if they
leave the original target area. The effects continue even if the target
container ceases to exist, for as long as the spell lasts (Circles are
an exception, and spells of this type with Circle Targets end if the
circle is broken). It does not affect anything that enters the target
container later, even if the spell is still in effect. This is the way
that spells with object Targets work, and can be referred to as a static
target, because the things targeted by the spell are fixed when the
spell is cast, and do not change.

Second, they can affect any valid target within the Target container
during the spell\'s period of effect. In this case, a valid target that
leaves the container ceases to be affected by the spell, and a valid
target that enters (or re-enters) the container is affected, until it
leaves or the spell expires. In this case, the spell ends if the
container ceases to exist, even if it has duration left. This can be
referred to as a dynamic target, because the things that are targeted by
the spell can change over the duration.

The way that a particular spell works is fixed when it is designed, and
cannot be changed by the casting magus, although a spell working in one
way is similar to a spell that is identical apart from working in the
other, and so knowledge of one gives a bonus to inventing the other.

For example, a spell to put pink dots on people\'s foreheads with Target
Room and Duration Moon could work in two ways. In the static version,
everyone in the room (on whom the spell Penetrates) at the time of
casting gets a pink dot on their forehead, and this pink dot remains on
their forehead until the new moon and full moon have both set, no matter
what happens to the room. In the dynamic version, anyone who is inside
the room (on whom the spell Penetrates) until the new moon and full moon
have both set gets a pink dot on their forehead, even if they were not
in the room when the spell was cast. When they leave the room, the pink
dot disappears, although it reappears if they go back into the room. If
the room ceases to exist before the duration expires, the spell ends
early. These two versions are two different spells, and a maga who wants
to cast both (and cannot reliably cast them spontaneously) needs to
create two spells.

**Being Inside a Container**

The standard Ars Magica rules use an intuitive definition of \"inside\"
when determining whether something is within a container target. A
person standing in the centre of a 1 pace diameter circle is inside the
circle; someone who happens to be standing directly above it three
floors higher is not. A person standing on the battlements of a castle
is within the Structure, but a crow flying over the walls is not. If
your troupe needs a more precise definition, you can work something out,
and nothing should break.

**Persistence of Containers**

The standard Ars Magica rules also use an intuitive definition of
whether a container still exists to be the target of a spell. If the
same container still exists, then the target still exists. An island
does not cease to exist when the tide rises or falls, unless a causeway
joins it to the mainland at low tide. A room does not cease to exist
when the door is opened, but a room inside a tent does cease to exist
when the tent is packed away. Containers can move if they are still the
same thing while, and after, moving. Note that certain choices of
container make spells vulnerable: if a Room is just a tent, the spell
can be ended by collapsing the tent, while if a Boundary is just a
fence, the spell can be ended by pulling down any part of the fence.
Containers can get larger or smaller, but spells do end if the container
becomes too big for the spell to affect.

Circles and Boundaries require some extra comment. A circle is a
different circle if its size changes, or if it is transferred to a
different surface. Circles are very vulnerable, which offsets the power
of Ring Duration and Circle Target. If a Boundary is nothing more than
the thing marking the border, then it is as vulnerable as a circle, and
cannot be moved, altered, or expanded. If a Boundary is something like
\"the waterline of this island\" or \"the wall around this covenant\",
then it is much less vulnerable, and may change with natural changes in
the thing.

Targets and Sizes

The Ars Magica spell Targets depend on the kind of thing that the target
is, not how big it is. A pebble and one of the stones at Stonehenge are
both Individuals, and the inside of a tiny hut and the nave of a
cathedral are both Rooms.

However, the size of the target does make a difference to the level of
the spell, with the exceptions of Intellego magic and Circle Targets.
Every Form has a base size for Individual targets, and targets of that
size or less can be affected by a spell of the basic level. Adding one
magnitude (five levels) to the spell multiplies the maximum size of its
target by ten. This depends on the mass or volume of the target, so a
five level boost to a Corpus spell would allow the magus to affect a
giant up to fifteen feet tall, not sixty feet tall. A spell designed to
affect a certain size of target can affect any target up to that size.
However, it is not possible to invent lower level spells that affect
smaller targets; the level of the spell to affect the base target is an
absolute lower limit.

This rule should not be applied with absolute mathematical precision. A
rough guess by the storyguide is fine, as long as the troupe agrees. In
the event of disagreement, however, a precise calculation can be made to
resolve the issue, although as this takes time it is probably best
reserved for working out exactly what a Formulaic spell can do.

A Part targeted by a spell can be up to the size of the base Individual.
Again, every magnitude added increases the size that can be affected by
a factor of ten. Note that a spell to affect an Individual is five
levels lower than a spell to affect a Part of the same size.

A base Group contains about as much mass or volume as ten standard
Individuals of the Form. This can be split up in any way desired, so it
could be two Individuals, each of five times standard size, or ten
Individuals of standard size, or ten thousand individuals, each one
thousandth of standard size. Every five levels added multiplies the size
affected by a factor of ten. Note that a spell to affect a large
Individual is five levels lower than a spell to affect a Group of the
same total mass.

A base Room is large enough to fit a hundred standard Individuals with
some squashing. For Corpus, this means that a base room is about four
hundred square feet in area. Because the Room already exists to create a
boundary, this is easier than affecting a Group, and a spell to affect a
number of Individuals within a Room can be lower level than a spell to
affect an Individual of similar size. Note also that, because a Room
cannot be internally divided without becoming two Rooms, the height of
the ceiling does not normally matter. For every five levels added to the
spell level, the area of the Room is multiplied by ten.

A base Structure contains ten base Rooms, spread over one or more
floors. For every five levels added the size of the Structure is
increased by a factor of ten.

A base Boundary is the same for all Forms, and is one hundred paces
(three hundred feet) in diameter. As for Rooms, every five levels added
multiplies the area by ten, or the diameter by a little over three.

Each Target level includes all of the possible sizes of that target,
even though the spell level changes. The size of the target can be
manipulated in the same way as the Target parameter, whether through
Virtues, MuVi, or other techniques, but these are all changes within the
same type of Target. For example, a Target Individual spell with +2
magnitudes for size, to affect an Individual 100 times the normal size,
has the same Target parameter as a Target Individual spell with no
magnitudes added for size.

If a spell makes changes to a target that mean that the size of the
applicable base Individual changes, the spell level must be able to
affect both the initial and final form. This is most likely to be an
issue when the final form has a smaller base Individual.

When changing the size of a non-living target, the base guideline is for
a spell that enlarges a target of the base size by a factor of up to
ten, or shrinks it by a factor of up to 100. Adding a magnitude to the
guideline allows the spell to enlarge the target by a further factor of
ten (for a total of 100 times larger), or shrink it by a further factor
of 100 (for a total of 10,000 times smaller). Modifications for the size
of the original target are in addition to these modifiers, so that a
spell to shrink an individual ten times larger than a base Individual by
a factor of 10,000 would be two magnitudes higher than the guideline
given for changing the size of the target. Forms dealing with living
targets have their own guidelines; for living targets, a change of 3
Size points is roughly equivalent to a change by a factor of ten.

**Intellego spells are not affected by Target size.**

**Base Individual: Determined by Form**

**Base Part: Same as Individual**

**Base Group: Mass of ten standard Individuals**

**Base Room: Large enough for 100 standard Individuals**

**Base Structure: Ten base Rooms**

**Base Boundary: An area 100 paces in diameter**

**Increasing size: Multiply size by ten for each magnitude added to the
spell.**

Volumes and Targets

Each increase in size on this list indicates approximately a ten-fold
increase in volume, and thus a 1 magnitude increase in spell level.

**50 cubic inches** = 2 pints, 4-inch-diameter sphere, five base
Individuals of Aquam (poison), a Small object on the Material and Size
table (page @@).

**500 cubic inches** = 2 gallons, 1-foot-diameter sphere, three base
Individuals of Terram (precious metal), a Medium object on the Material
and Size table.

**3 cubic feet** = 20 gallons, 2-foot-diameter sphere, three base
Individuals of Terram (base metal), five base Individuals of Aquam
(corrosive), a Large object on the Material and Size table

**1 cubic pace** = 200 gallons, 4-foot-diameter sphere, base Individual
of Ignem, base Individual of Terram (stone), five base Individuals of
Aquam (processed liquid), a Huge object on the Material and Size table.

**10 cubic paces** = 2, 000 gallons, 8-foot-diameter sphere, base
Individual of Terram (dirt), five base Individuals of Aquam (natural
liquid).

**100 cubic paces** = 6-pace-diameter sphere, five base Individuals of
Aquam (water).

**1000 cubic paces** = 12-pace-diameter sphere, cylinder 20 paces high
and half as wide, cylinder 8 paces high and twice as wide, pool 16 paces
in diameter and half as deep.

Ritual Spells

Ritual spells take longer to cast than formulaic spells and require vis.
However, they do have some advantages.

Formulaic and Spontaneous spells may not have Year duration

Formulaic and Spontaneous spells may not have Boundary target. They may
have Vision target, if they are magical sense spells.

Formulaic and Spontaneous spells may not have a level greater than 50.
(Note that they may have a level of 50, but not 51 or higher.)

In addition, other features of a spell may require a Ritual.

If the guideline requires a Ritual, the spell must be a Ritual.

If the spell is a Momentary Creo spell creating a lasting thing, it must
be a Ritual.

If the effect of the spell is, in the troupe's judgement, so spectacular
that it must not be easily accessible to magi, then the spell must be a
Ritual. The guidelines are designed so that such spells will normally be
over level 50, and thus Rituals anyway, but not all troupes will agree
with all cases.

Ritual spells are always at least level 20, even if the level
calculation would make them lower.

It is never possible to replicate the effects of a Ritual spell with
Spontaneous magic, even when casting Ceremonially.

Requisites

Most spells involve a simple combination of two Arts, one Form and one
Technique. Some spells, however, involve more than two. For instance, a
spell that turns a human into a bird uses Muto because you are
transforming something, Corpus because you are affecting a human body,
and Animal because you are turning the human body into an animal body.
In addition to involving the two primary Arts --- Corpus and Muto in
this case --- casting the spell concerns your Animal score as well. This
third Art is a requisite.

There are two kinds of requisite. The first simply allows the spell to
have its affect. This includes the Animal requisite on a spell to turn a
person into a bird. These requisites do not add to the spell level, as
the difficulty of doing such a thing is already accounted for in the
guidelines.

The second adds an effect to a spell. In this case, the base Arts and
level for the spell are those for the highest-level effect it has. For
example, a magic item that changes a picture to show what is happening
at a distant location is an Intellego Imaginem spell with a Muto
requisite, not a Muto Imaginem spell with an Intellego requisite, as the
Intellego effect is of much higher level.

As a general rule of thumb, if the spell would still do something
without the requisite, but it would do significantly less, then each
requisite adds at least one magnitude to the level of the spell. Thus,
the Herbam and Terram requisites that allow a spell to change a clothed
man into a bird do not add any levels, because they do not significantly
increase the power of the spell. However, a Rego requisite added to a
Creo Ignem spell to prevent the fire from burning the caster would
require additional levels. In addition, a single spell that could turn a
human into a wolf, or a wolf into a human, would require an additional
magnitude for the Animal requisite, as without it the spell could only
effect the transformation in one direction. Most such requisites add
only a single magnitude to the spell level, but if the additional effect
is sixth magnitude or above, it is often appropriate to add two
magnitudes.

Additional effects may not require a requisite if they are purely
cosmetic. Thus, a spell that creates fire that looks like flaming skulls
does not require an Imaginem requisite. A spell that allowed the caster
to choose how the fire looked would, because that flexibility is more
than a cosmetic effect.

Requisites, if any, are listed for each formulaic spell. (See the spell
*Curse of Circe* on page @@ as an example.) Requisites make it more
difficult to cast spells, as they demand the caster have wider
knowledge. You must use the lesser of your score in the requisite and
your score in the spell\'s main Technique or Form --- Technique if the
requisite is a Technique, Form if the requisite is a Form. For example,
if you have the scores Animal 6 and Corpus 13, and you cast the Muto
Corpus spell *Curse of Circe*, which has a requisite of Animal, you
treat your Corpus score as if it were only 6. Note that if your
requisite happened to be higher (for example, if your Animal were 15),
you would use the lower basic form (your Corpus of 13 in this case).

Sometimes a spell has a requisite for both its Technique and Form. You
must use the lowest in each case. And, if several requisites apply to
the same primary Art (for example, if there are two Form requisites),
your effective score is the lowest of the group. Furthermore, any
Deficiencies you have with an Art apply when you use that Art as a
requisite.

Requisites listed with a spell\'s statistics apply when you are
learning, inventing, or casting that spell, but do not apply for other
purposes, such as determining the defender\'s Magic Resistance. The
defender\'s Magic Resistance is determined by the spell\'s primary Form,
not that listed as a requisite, even if the caster\'s requisite Form
score is lower than that of his primary Form score, and thus determines
the Casting Total. Similarly, a spell can only be boosted by vis that
matches the primary Technique or Form, and effects that affect spells
based on their Arts rely on the primary Arts.

**Requisite Necessary for Spell\'s Effect: +0 magnitudes**

**Requisite Enhances Spell\'s Effect: +1 magnitude or more**

**Added Effect is Purely Cosmetic: No requisite**

Casting Requisites

Some requisites are not listed along with a spell\'s statistics because
they only apply when the spell is being used in a certain way, not when
learning or inventing it. These are called casting requisites. You
choose which Arts you use as casting requisites when casting the spell,
so what you can affect is limited by your choice. The lowest Technique
score and Form score among the primary Arts and all the chosen casting
requisites are the ones you use when you cast the spell.

Spontaneous Requisites

Requisites work the same way for spontaneous spells. When the Arts to be
used are determined, determine whether requisites are involved. If so,
they limit your Arts just as they do for Formulaic spells.

Spell Format

Each spell has several factors that describe it for game use. They are
discussed below.

Technique and Form

The Technique and Form are listed in the heading the spell is found
under. Spells are arranged first by their Forms, then by their
Techniques, in alphabetical order. Following each Technique/Form heading
are guidelines that will help you create your own spells, as well as
help you determine the necessary level to cast a Spontaneous spell.

The base Range, Duration, and Target for almost all guidelines are the
lowest categories: Personal, Momentary, Individual. Thus, a useful spell
will often be of significantly higher level than the guideline for that
effect, because it has a higher Range, Duration, and Target. There are
some exceptions, primarily guidelines for wards, and these are noted
explicitly in the guideline. If the guideline does not specify a Range,
Duration, or Target, they are Personal, Momentary, and Individual.

Techniques and Forms are often abbreviated by the first two letters of
each word; thus a MuTe spell is of Muto Technique and Terram Form. The
level is often added after the abbreviation --- thus *Flash of the
Scarlet Flames* becomes CrIg 15.

Title

The titles given are the actual names of spells as known by Hermetic
magi. When inventing new spells, try to give them creative names that
will add color to the game. \"Fireball\" is not interesting; \"Ball of
Abysmal Flame\" is --- you get the idea.

Level

Most spells are assigned a level, which is usually a multiple of five.
It need not be, however, and magi may well invent spells of intermediate
levels. Spontaneous spells often have other levels, as well.

Some spells are General spells (abbreviated to Gen), which means that
they may be learned at any level of difficulty-the higher the level, the
more powerful the spell.

The level at which you know a General level formulaic or ritual spell
depends on where you obtained it. If you learned a General level spell
that was designed for effectiveness at level 15, then that is the level
at which you know it. You cannot produce effects that exceed level 15
effects with that spell unless you invent a version with a higher level
or learn such a version from another source. General level spells are
open-ended only in the sense that they may be learned at any level. They
may not be used at a level higher (or lower) than that which is known,
and different levels of a General level spell are still different
spells.

Ritual

Spells requiring rituals are those that fall outside the categories
listed for Formulaic and Spontaneous spells described under \"Ritual
Spells\" on page @@. Certain powerful spells and spells inherited from
the Cult of Mercury are also Ritual spells. Storyguides should use their
discretion in declaring other spells Ritual.

Requisites

Requisites make it more difficult to cast spells, as they demand the
caster have greater knowledge. See \"Requisites\" on page @@ for a full
description of how they limit the casters of particular spells.
Requisites that always apply are listed along with a spell\'s
statistics. Casting requisites are listed within the body of the spell
description.

Description

Describes the effects of the spell. Descriptions cover about 95% of the
circumstances in which spells are used, but since magic is variable,
unpredictable, and can be used in a number of ways, the responsibility
for determining the effects in unusual situations lies with the
storyguide.

Some of the spell descriptions include visual descriptions, hand
gestures, and wizard\'s sigils. It should be noted that these are all
examples and that you shouldn\'t feel bound by them. In fact, you should
customize all your spells in ways appropriate to your own magus. When
you give special details to your own customized versions of these
spells, you are rewarded with a more interesting game.

Spell Damage

Many spells have damage listed in the form +X. This is an abbreviation
for stress die + X. The damage inflicted by such spells varies from one
casting to another. The target resists this damage with their Soak
Total + stress die.

Design

A parenthetical line at the end of the description gives the
calculations for the spell level. The base level is given in levels, and
other modifications in magnitudes. Remember that adding a magnitude adds
one level up to level five, and five levels thereafter.

The Wizard\'s Sigil

When you invent a spell, some amount of your personal magical style is
likely to manifest itself, giving the spell some small quirk or minor
detail that identifies it as yours. This recurrent mark or quirk in a
magus\'s spell (which doesn\'t usually change the effectiveness of the
spell) is termed his \"wizard\'s sigil.\" Once known, these quirks can
identify certain magi as having cast certain spells. Throughout this
chapter, various sample spell sigils are listed in the descriptions.
Keep in mind that these are just guidelines. They\'re meant to give you
ideas to better personalize your spells, and perhaps to aid you in
choosing your own sigil. See page @@ in the Hermetic Magic chapter for
further details.

Note that even when you learn a spell from another magus, or from a lab
text, you are actually inventing it, with guidance, so it is always your
sigil that manifests in your spells.

Animal Spells

Animal spells affect all natural living things that are not plants or
humans, doing to animals what Mentem and Corpus spells do to people.
Animal spells may affect any animal-like mind or body. They also affect
things made with animal products, such as leather, bone, or wool.

To tell if an Animal spell will affect the mind of a creature, determine
from the animal\'s Characteristics if it has Cunning or Intelligence. If
the creature has Intelligence, a Mentem spell must be used. If it has
Cunning, an Animal spell must be used. When a creature or person who has
an Intelligence Characteristic is shapechanged, Animal spells that
affect the mind are not effective. Instead, Mentem spells are needed.
However, the body of such a being may be affected by Animal spells,
including spells like *The Falcon\'s Hood* (PeAn 20).

If a human body has animal parts (such as bat wings), those parts can be
affected by Animal spells, even though the rest of the body is only
affected by Corpus spells.

A Bjornaer magus in animal form is truly an animal, so his mind is
affected by Animal spells rather than Mentem spells, and his body by
Animal spells rather than Corpus spells. However, spells with continuing
effects cast on one form continue to affect the other. Most
shapechangers do not change their essential nature, which remains human,
so their bodies can still be affected by Corpus spells, as well as by
Animal.

A basic Individual for Animal is an animal of about the same size as a
pony, Size +1 or lower.

Creo Animal Guidelines

Most Animal spells cannot be used with Personal range, so the level of a
spell must be higher than the guidelines given.

To create treated animal products (like leather, jointed meat, and
cloth) add one magnitude to the level necessary to create the equivalent
amount of dead animal. To create treated and processed animal products,
such as a leather jacket or a woolen tunic, add two magnitudes to the
level necessary to create the equivalent amount of dead animal.

In order to influence the behavior of created animals, a Rego requisite
is required, and as this is an additional effect it adds at least one
magnitude to the spell level. Otherwise they just do what comes
naturally.

Creo Animal botches often produce the wrong sort of animal, or produce
an animal enraged with the caster.

Level 1: Give an animal a +1 bonus to Recovery rolls.

Level 2: Give an animal a +3 bonus to Recovery rolls.

Preserve a corpse from decay.

Level 3: Give an animal a +6 bonus to Recovery rolls.

Level 4: Give an animal a +9 bonus to Recovery rolls.

Level 5: Create an animal product, such as spidersilk or wool. (Note
that an Individual is a single hair, a single hide, or a single tusk.)

Create an insect or similar bug.

Give an animal a +12 bonus to Recovery rolls.

Level 10: Create the corpse of an animal.

Create a bird, reptile, fish, or amphibian.

Give an animal a +15 bonus to Recovery rolls.

Level 15: Heal a Light Wound.

Give an animal a +18 bonus to Recovery rolls.

Create a mammal.

Cause an animal to reach full maturity over the course of a single day
or night. This accelerated maturation only applies during the spell\'s
Duration, and thus full effect requires a Sun Duration spell cast early
in the day or night.

Level 20: Heal a Medium Wound.

Give an animal a +21 bonus to Recovery rolls.

Cause an animal to reach full maturity over the course of about two
hours.

Level 25: Stop the progress of a disease.

Heal a Heavy Wound.

Restore a lost sense.

Restore a lost limb.

Cure a disease, counteracting its effects. (Unless cast as a Momentary
Ritual, this is the same as stopping the progress of a disease.)

Cause an animal to reach full maturity over the course of ten Diameters
(twenty minutes).

Level 30: Heal an Incapacitating Wound.

Increase one of an animal\'s Characteristics by one point, to no more
than the average score for that kind of animal.

Cause an animal to reach full maturity over the course of a single
Diameter.

Level 35: Heal all wounds.

Increase one of an animal\'s Characteristics by one point, to no more
than one higher than the average score for that kind of animal.

Level 40: Increase one of an animal\'s Characteristics by one point, to
no more than two higher than the average score for that kind of animal.

Cause an animal to reach full maturity in a moment.

Level 45: Increase one of an animal\'s Characteristics by one point, to
no more than three higher than the average score for that kind of
animal.

Level 50: Create a magical beast. When creating a magical creature, the
Magic Might of the creature cannot exceed the level of the spell, and
requisites must be included for any special powers (for example, Ignem
if it can breathe fire, Rego and Mentem if it can control people\'s
minds). A Vim requisite, for the magical nature, is always required.

Increase one of an animal\'s Characteristics by one point, to no more
than four higher than the average score for that kind of animal.

Level 55: Increase one of an animal\'s Characteristics by one point, to
no more than five higher than the average score for that kind of animal.
A greater increase is not within the natural range for the animal, and
thus cannot be effected by Creo magic.

Level 75: Raise an animal from the dead.

Creo Animal Spells

Level 20

Soothe Pains of the Beast

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual

This spell looks much like a ritualistic \"laying on of hands\" seen in
many churches. You kneel and press your hands to the wound while
reciting a quiet incantation. The spell cures one Light Wound suffered
by the animal.

Asaron of Flambeau believes his mission in life is to repopulate the
world so there will be more to kill, and thus spends seasons healing
animals and people throughout Europe. In his version of this spell, a
black patch in the shape of a tongue of fire is left where the wound
was. A symbolic flame is seen in almost all of Asaron\'s spells, making
it his wizard\'s sigil.

(Base level 15, +1 Touch)

True Rest of the Injured Brute

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Ind

The injured target gets a +9 bonus to all Recovery rolls made while the
spell is in effect.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +3 Moon)

Level 35

Weaver\'s Trap of Webs

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Group

In casting this spell, you point and from the indicated initial
location, a huge net of spider webs grows, filling an area 5 paces by 5
paces by 6 feet high. With supports, the webs can hang vertically,
forming a wall; otherwise they act like a net. When the webs are through
growing after a few seconds, they are as thick as string and as strong
as iron. Everyone caught in the area of the webs is immobilized. Getting
free requires a Strength stress roll of 12+, or someone who is not
trapped may use an edged weapon to free a victim, which takes three
rounds. Contrary to widespread rumor, fire is ineffective against these
webs. Webs may continue to trap victims in the future, as long as the
spell lasts and they aren\'t completely hacked apart.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 Group (total mass of the spiderwebs is
still less than ten basic Individuals, so no size adjustment))

The Wizard\'s Mount

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Creates a horse, which is normal in every way except that it is not
disturbed by The Gift.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 size)

Level 50

Curse of the Ravenous Swarm

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Group, Ritual

Req: Rego

Calls a swarm of locusts or other destructive insects upon an area,
which destroys wild plant life and fields. When the spell\'s duration
ends, all the insects disappear, leaving nothing but the damage. The
Rego requisite ensures that the insects only devastate the area desired
by the caster.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +3 Moon, +2 Group, +2 size, for a swarm weighing as
much as one thousand pigs, +1 extra effect from requisite, ritual
because it has a really major effect)

Intellego Animal Guidelines

When you try to get information from an animal, remember that its
memories are gathered through its particular senses, with their
particular strengths and weaknesses. For example, dogs remember much
about odors of various things, but often forget details of how they
looked. Animals do not remember human words, but might remember tone of
voice and such. You may not get the exact information you are looking
for.

To communicate with an animal, you must bring yourself to the animal\'s
mental level --- a process that might have strange, though temporary,
effects on you. For example, you might have a craving for raw meat or
speak very slowly for a moment after communicating with a bear.

Since Animal includes aspects of both Corpus and Mentem with regard to
beasts, guidelines that apply to the latter two may apply to Animal.
InCo and InMe may be referred to for additional ideas.

Botches with InAn normally result in false information.

Level 1: Get a mental image of an animal.

Level 3: Sense the state of consciousness of a beast.

Get general information about an animal's body.

Level 4: Sense the dominant drive of a beast.

Learn a specific fact about an animal's body.

Level 5: Learn the origin, age, and history of something made of animal
products.

Level 10: Speak with an animal.

Read an animal\'s surface thoughts.

Level 15: Read the recent memories of a beast.

Level 20: Thoroughly probe the mind of a beast.

Intellego Animal Spells

Level 5

Image of the Beast

R: Arc D: Mom, T: Ind

Gives you a hazy mental image of an animal you have an Arcane Connection
to.

Wounds caused by an animal are an Arcane Connection to that animal with
a lifetime of a few hours. This spell can thus be used to find out what
was responsible for an attack.

All spells cast by Chavin of Tytalus can be recognized because they
promote or advocate war or violence. In his version of this spell, the
claws and teeth of the beast appear more dangerous.

(Base 1, +4 Arcane Connection)

Level 10

Shiver of the Lycanthrope

R: Per, D: Conc, T: Touch

You feel a sudden shiver if you are touching a person or beast that is
actually a lycanthrope. Variants of this spell detect other types of
shapechanger, but not Bjornaer with Heartbeasts.

(Base 4, +1 Concentration, +1 Touch)

Level 25

Opening the Tome of the Animal\'s Mind

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

You touch the head of the animal in question and read its memories of
the past day. The further the animal is from human, the harder it is to
read its memories accurately. If you simply scan the beast\'s memories,
not looking for anything special, you get the memories the beast thinks
are most important. If you are trying to get a specific fact, you need a
Perception + Finesse stress roll against an Ease Factor of 6, or 12 if
the fact is obscure. Since normal animals are sensitive to magic, they
resist your touch and try to shy away from you both when the spell is
cast and while the spell continues to function. This can be quite a
problem with larger animals.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +1 Concentration)

Level 30

Hunter\'s Sense

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Hearing

You sense the shapes and primary motivations of all animals above a
certain size that you can hear, or could hear if they were making a
noise. You decide the size threshold when you cast the spell, such as
\"all animals larger than a fox.\" The \'noise\' of an animal\'s shape
is louder the larger it is, while the \'noise\' of its motivations
increases depending on how intense the motivation is. A rabbit fleeing
from a fox would sound fearful, very loudly. The fox\'s motivation might
be fairly quiet, especially if recent hunting had been good.

(Base 4, +2 Sun, +3 Hearing, +1 for shape *and* primary motivation)

Muto Animal Guidelines

Animals granted new abilities, such as wings, will need a few minutes to
get used to them. When transforming things, you can transform things
that they are carrying with appropriate requisites. For example, you
could transform a horse and its armor with a Terram requisite.

Animals are not infinitely mutable, and using too many of these spells
for too long on an animal can warp its natural constitution and even
destroy it. Muto Corpus spells may be examined to get additional ideas
and guidelines for Muto Animal Spells. Common sigils seen in Muto Animal
spells involve animals being changed in some strange way. Beasts
transformed by Julian of Flambeau, with *The Beast Remade* (MuAn 25),
might have bright red hair in their new form, while toads created by
Silva of Merinita, with *Transformation of the Ravenous Beast to the
Torpid Toad* (MuAn 30), might have a comical coloration.

MuAn botches often change the caster instead of the target, or change
the target in a way very different from that intended.

Level 1: Make a superficial change to something made of animal products
(like changing its color).

Level 2: Make a major change to something made of animal products that
preserves the substance (for example, turn a leather jerkin into a
saddle).

Make a superficial change to a beast.

Level 3: Change an animal\'s limb.

Change something made of animal products into a different animal
product.

Level 4: Make a major change in a beast, while leaving it recognizably
the same sort of animal (for example, make a horse bigger and change its
color).

Change something made of animal products in a minor unnatural way.

Level 5: Change an animal into a different animal.

Change an animal in a minor way so that it is no longer natural (for
example, change the color of a horse\'s coat to match the covenant\'s
coat of arms).

Change something made of animal products in a major unnatural way.

Level 10: Change an animal into a human (though it retains its animal
mentality and does not gain a soul, requires a Corpus requisite).

Change an animal into a plant (requires a Herbam requisite).

Level 15: Change an animal in a major unnatural way (for example, give a
horse claws, fangs, and scaly armored skin).

Change an animal into a non-living item (appropriate requisite
required).

Level 25: Radically change an animal in an unnatural way (for example,
give a horse wings). Give an animal a \'magical\' ability, such as the
ability to breathe fire (requires a requisite for the ability).

Muto Animal Spells

Level 15

Beast of Outlandish Size

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Changes the Size of an animal by +1. This change modifies Strength by
+2, the range for each wound level increases by one, and Quickness falls
by one. The new beast is of huge size, and looks much more impressive
than its former self. Townspeople may run in fear of it, and there is
little doubt among them that it is a creature of magic.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

Doublet of Impenetrable Silk

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind.

Change an item made of animal material --- silk, wool, or leather --- so
it cannot be cut or penetrated by weapons. A simple cloth doublet
becomes the equivalent of armor with no Load and a +3 Soak bonus. Armor
made of quilted material or any kind of leather improves its Protection
by an additional +3. The magic does not make the armor better at
absorbing shock, so this +3 bonus is the limit that can be bestowed
without changing the material into something completely different. At
the storyguide\'s option, the bonus given by this spell may not apply
against strictly blunt weapons like clubs and staves.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

Growth of the Creeping Things

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Causes an insect, mouse, toad, or other small (Size --9) creature to
grow to four times its normal size. If it was venomous before, it is
even more venomous now. Semi-venomous creatures, like most spiders, have
poison with an Ease Factor of 6 that does a Light Wound.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

Level 20

Beast of Minuscule Proportions

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

Reduces the size of an animal by 2. This modifies Strength by --4,
reduces the range for each wound type by two points, and increases
Quickness by +2. The beast appears to be the runt of its litter, unfit
to live.

(Base: 4, +2 Voice, +2 Sun)

Level 25

The Beast Remade

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Requisite: Corpus

Gives one land beast a human form, though its intellect remains the
same. Some feature of the animal is retained in the human form. A former
dog might have an exceptionally hairy human body, and a former cat might
let loose an occasional \"meow.\" Once transformed, the beast is
disoriented for a while before it becomes used to its new body.

(Base 10, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, no addition for requisite)

Transformation of the Ravenous Beast to the Torpid Toad

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

Turns any animal into a toad. A newly created toad will hold a certain
terror for peasants and serfs, because many believe toads exude a
poisonous substance from their skin.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +2 Sun)

Level 35

Steed of Vengeance

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Turns a horse into a ferocious magical mount. Its coat becomes a deep
black and its eyes a fiery red, its teeth transform into fangs, its
hooves become razor-sharp, and it occasionally breathes steam from its
mouth --- the horse seems a creature from Hell itself. All its Attack
rolls get a +5 bonus. The horse tolerates a magus rider. When the spell
wears off, the horse must make a Stamina stress roll against an Ease
Factor of 9 or die from shock.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 size)

Perdo Animal Guidelines

There is normally no Soak against Perdo Animal --- the magic does not
create something that causes damage, it just causes damage. Magic
Resistance is the only way to withstand it.

A common sigil among Flambeau magi, and others who cast Perdo spells, is
to leave some type of mark with the damage they do.

When inventing new spells, you may wish to consult Perdo Corpus for
guidelines and ideas.

PeAn botches might affect the caster, or affect the wrong animal.

Level 2: Damage something made of animal products.

Level 3: Do superficial damage to a beast (for example, remove its
hair).

Level 4: Destroy something made of animal products.

Cause a beast pain, but do no real damage.

Make a beast lose one Fatigue level.

Level 5: Injure an animal so that it is hampered, but not damaged. For
example, make a horse lame, a bird lose its voice, or weaken the scales
of a serpent. This roughly halves the effectiveness of the targeted
thing. Recovery as from a Light Wound.

Destroy an animal\'s corpse.

Inflict a Light Wound.

Level 10: Inflict a Medium Wound.

Level 15: Destroy one of a beast\'s minor senses.

Inflict a Heavy Wound.

Cripple a beast\'s limb, so that it is unusable but could heal.

Age a beast by one-twelfth of its natural lifespan. Only affects beasts
that have already reached maturity.

Level 20: Inflict an Incapacitating Wound.

Destroy or sever a beast\'s limb, so that it cannot naturally regain it.

Destroy one of a beast\'s major senses.

Level 30: Kill an animal.

Level 40: Destroy one property of an animal, such as its weight or
aggression.

Perdo Animal Spells

Level 10

Decay Fur and Hide

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Destroys an object made of animal fur or hide, including wool and
leather.

Marius of Tremere\'s version of this spell has the target disappear in
an impressive puff of smoke.

(Base 4, +2 Voice)

Level 15

Agony of the Beast

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

After you point at the beast and cast this spell, it begins lashing
wildly about, upsetting any nearby objects, and howling in great pain.
In order to do anything else, the beast must make a Stamina + Size
stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9 each round.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +1 Concentration)

Level 20

Blunt the Viper\'s Fangs

R: Voice, D: Momentary, T: Individual

Blunt the claws, teeth, talons, or other natural weapons of a beast.
Only sharp weapons may be affected: this spell does not affect a weapon
such as a horse\'s hoof or a giant snake\'s coils. The blunted weapon
has its total damage (including Attack Advantage) reduced to half (round
up). The beast may recover from the effect as if it were a Light Wound.
The spell may affect animals of size up to +4.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +1 size)

Level 25

The Falcon\'s Hood

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Destroys an animal\'s vision. The blindness heals as if it is a Medium
Wound. The title refers to the hood used to cover a falcon\'s eyes when
it is not hunting.

When cast by Asaron of Flambeau, this spell causes the animals it
targets to bear a faint silhouette of a flame in their eyes.

(Base 20, +1 Touch)

Cripple the Howling Wolf

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

When casting this spell, you commonly make an abrupt snapping motion
with your hands. One of the target\'s legs breaks cleanly. The animal
cannot walk on that leg, but the damage heals as a Medium Wound. Note
that the target need not be a wolf, and that you cannot choose which
leg.

(Base 15, +2 Voice)

Rego Animal Guidelines

You may further refer to Corpus for ideas and guidelines on controlling
an animal\'s body, and Rego Mentem spells for ideas and guidelines on
controlling an animal\'s mind.

Sigils typical in Rego Animal spells are those that cause beasts to act
in certain ways.

ReAn botches could put the caster under the control of the animal, or
make the animal act in a way opposite to that intended. They could also
appear to work, and then suddenly reverse at an extremely inconvenient
moment.

General: Ward against beings associated with Animal from one
supernatural realm (Divine, Faerie, Infernal, or Magic) with Might less
than or equal to the level of the spell. (Touch, Ring, Circle)

Create a circle warding against animals from one realm (Divine, Faerie,
Infernal, or Magic) with Might less than or equal to the level of the
spell (Touch, Ring, Circle). Note that animals are not necessarily
associated with Animal, or vice versa.

Level 1: Manipulate items made from animal products.

Level 2: Plant a single suggestion in the mind of an animal.

Protect the target from animal attacks (only affects animals without
supernatural abilities).

Treat items made of animal products.

Level 3: Treat and process items made of animal products.

Level 4: Calm an animal.

Level 5: Manipulate an animal\'s emotions.

Paralyze an animal.

Ward against animals or objects made from animal products. (Touch, Ring,
Circle)

Level 5: Control a disembodied spirit associated with Animal.

Cause vermin to spontaneously generate in appropriate matter, such as
flesh, plants, soil, or water.

Level 10: Make an animal completely passive.

Transport an animal instantly up to 5 paces. Non-living animal products
are transported with Rego Terram. Add 1 magnitude to increase the
distance to 50 paces, 2 magnitudes for 500 paces, 3 magnitudes for 1
league, 4 magnitudes for seven leagues, and 5 magnitudes to a place for
which you have an Arcane Connection.

Level 15: Completely control an animal.

Summon a disembodied spirit associated with Animal.

Rego Animal Spells

General

Ward Against the Beasts of Legend

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

No magical beast whose Magic Might is equal to or less than the level
can affect anyone within the Circle or, if it is within the Circle,
affect those outside. When a magus is making this and most other wards,
a common gesture employed is the Fig Sign. The magus balls his or her
right hand into a fist, placing the thumb between the index and middle
fingers. A magus traveling to Italy should be warned that this sign is a
deadly insult in that country.

(As ward guideline)

Level 5

Disguise of the Putrid Aroma

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

The target takes no interest in you as long as you continue to
concentrate, and do not threaten it. A carnivore treats you as if you
were simply something it does not eat. It retains normal interest,
however, in anyone else nearby.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +1 Concentration)

Circle of Beast Warding

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

The caster inscribes a circle that no normal beast will cross.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Ring)

Level 10

Soothe the Ferocious Bear

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Calms an animal until it is threatened or aroused again. You must speak
soothingly or musically to it, and something as simple as approaching it
may arouse it again.

(Base 4, +2 Voice)

Level 15

Panic of the Elephant\'s Mouse

R: Eye, D: Conc, T: Ind

Makes an animal afraid of the target by preying upon its instinctive
fears, causing it to attempt escape by the quickest, most feasible means
possible. The animal may make a Size stress roll against an Ease Factor
of 9 to resist. (The title refers to the elephant\'s legendary fear of
mice, but note that this spell cannot actually affect elephants, as they
are too large.)

(Base 5, +1 Eye, +1 Concentration)

Viper\'s Gaze

R: Eye, D: Conc, T: Ind

Holds an animal rigid as long as you maintain eye contact with it and
concentrate on it.

(Base 5, +1 Eye, +1 Concentration)

Level 25

The Gentle Beast

R: Eye, D: Conc, T: Ind

Calms an animal, making it nearly fearless. It does not resist being
ridden, shaved, or whatever else you can think of. If the animal enters
combat, is extremely frightened, or incurs any kind of wound, the spell
ends. The animal must be Size +4 or less.

(Base 10, +1 Eye, +1 Concentration, +1 size)

Mastering the Unruly Beast

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

You can make an animal perform any act it is capable of. You can only
issue new commands while touching the animal, but the animal will carry
them out without requiring constant contact. Further, the animal will
allow you to touch it throughout the duration of the spell. It is
difficult to maintain control of particularly stubborn or fierce
animals, such as mules or boars --- creatures with appropriate
Personality Traits may roll against an Ease Factor of 12 each round.

When Chavin of Tytalus casts this spell, the creature acts surly and
unfriendly while going about its tasks, even when Chavin doesn\'t
specifically tell it to act that way.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +1 Concentration)

Level 30

Commanding the Harnessed Beast

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

You implant a complicated command into an animal, which it carries out
to the best of its abilities. The command must involve completing a
certain task, such as finding a certain person. Vague orders, like
\"protect me,\" do not work. If the animal does not complete the task
before the end of the spell approaches, it becomes desperately
ferocious, especially at night.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

Aquam Spells

Aquam spells affect water and all other liquids. Liquids that are part
of a body, particularly a living body, can only be affected by spells
designed specifically to do so, with appropriate requisites.

The application of the target categories to Aquam magic is not as
obvious as it is for some other Forms, so further guidelines are given
here. If the standard targets do apply, they may also be used.

Individual: A stretch of water with the same composition and current. A
small pond, part of a stream, or a spring.

Part: A part of an Individual. This category applies easily.

Group: A number of Individuals. This can include a large river, where
there are several different currents, a number of rivers flowing
together, or a lake.

Room, Structure and Boundary work as for other Forms; the spell affects
all the liquid within the target area.

A base Individual for Aquam is a pool of water about five paces (fifteen
feet) across, and two paces deep at the center. Naturally-occurring
liquids, such as fruit juice or olive oil, have a base Individual
one-tenth the size, about two paces across and about one deep. Processed
liquids, such as wine or beer, have a base Individual one hundredth the
size, a pool about one pace across and half a pace deep. Corrosive and
otherwise dangerous liquids have a base Individual ten times smaller
again, a puddle about half a pace across and about a fifth of a pace
deep. Poisons have a base Individual of a single dose.

Creo Aquam Guidelines

Water created temporarily quenches thirst but provides no lasting
benefits to the drinker. It can be used to wash, and the things washed
stay clean. Common sigils for Creo Aquam spells include water with a
specific scent, color, or flavor.

CrAq botches might create far too much water (think of the Sorcerer\'s
Apprentice), or the wrong kind of liquid.

Slightly unnatural liquids are one magnitude harder than water, very
unnatural liquids are two magnitudes harder, and require a Muto
requisite.

Poisons created at the guideline level have an Ease Factor of 3. Each
magnitude added to the level of the spell adds 3 to the Ease Factor.

General: Create a corrosive substance doing +(Level) damage. Increasing
the range to more than Touch is a very good idea.

Level 2: Fill a container with water (or some other natural liquid, with
appropriate requisites).

Level 3: Create water (or some other natural liquid) that is not
contained (for example, spread over a surface).

Create ice in a natural shape, such as a floe or icicle.

Level 4: Create water (or some other natural liquid) in an unnatural
shape (for example, in a sphere over someone\'s head) --- but water so
created will behave normally.

Create a spring with a low rate of flow.

Level 5: Create a poison that causes a Light Wound.

Create a spring with a high rate of flow.

Level 10: Create a geyser with a very high rate of flow.

Create poison that causes a Medium Wound.

Level 15: Create poison that causes a Heavy Wound.

Level 20: Create a poison that causes an Incapacitating Wound.

Level 25: Create a poison that causes a Fatal Wound.

Create a water elemental from a base amount of elemental material.
(Ritual)

Creo Aquam Spells

Level 5

Footsteps of Slippery Oil

R: Touch, D: Diam, T: Ind

From each of the next ten footsteps the caster of this spell takes,
nonflammable grease spreads out, leaving a slick area 10 paces wide.
Dexterity stress rolls are required to remain upright whenever a
character on the oil does something more challenging than walking. A
roll against an Ease Factor of 6 is needed for the average maneuver,
with Ease Factors of up to 15 needed to (for example) make a right turn
at full speed on a smooth, greased surface. The duration is the length
of time that the oil lasts.

This spell was invented by a rather good-natured magus, and the gestures
associated with the most common variations of the spell are as comical
as the effects themselves. You stand first on one leg, and then the
other, vigorously rubbing the bottom of each upturned foot, as if
spreading on a salve.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Diam)

Level 15

Creeping Oil

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

Saturates a porous material with flammable oil. When casting this spell,
you make a flicking motion with your index finger and thumb, as if
propelling something at the target. A dot of oil appears on the target
after the spell is finished, and slowly spreads over the target,
saturating enough cloth to cover a person. If used on a person\'s
clothes and ignited, the oil does +12 damage the first round, +6 the
second, and +0 the third.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 Sun)

Level 20

Mighty Torrent of Water

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

A 3-foot-diameter jet of water sprays from your outstretched arms
towards your target. The target of this gusher of water takes +10 damage
and must make a Strength + Size stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9
or be sent flying back.

Marbaid of Flambeau\'s wizard\'s sigil is connected to his obsession
with blood. In his version of the spell the target is hit by a gush of
blood, and the stains do not go away until sunrise/sunset. This does not
require a requisite, as it is a purely cosmetic effect.

(Base 10, +2 Voice)

Level 40

Deluge of Rushing and Dashing

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Causes a stream to flood, starting at the stream\'s nearest point to you
and continuing downstream. The results of this spell are generally quite
impressive. As the stream overflows its original bed, it becomes a
raging torrent, sucking in everything near it. Damage from the spell can
last for many years.

As long as you concentrate, the stream remains at flood levels. Anyone
caught near the stream when it floods is struck by the rush of water
(+10 damage), caught up in the flood, and dragged along. Every round, a
victim makes a Strength + Swim stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9.
Success means the character escapes the flood. Otherwise, the character
loses one Fatigue level and takes +5 damage. Any who fall unconscious
drown. This roll is repeated until the character either escapes the
flood or dies.

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +1 Concentration, +3 size, so that the whole stream
floods)

Intellego Aquam Guidelines

Note that Intellego Aquam spells do not normally require requisites
depending on the type of liquid targeted.

Most sigils manifest in Intellego Aquam spells by causing the
information to be reported in some slightly quirky way. For example,
Chavin of Tytalus\'s version of *Voice of the Lake* always makes the
lake sound strong, masculine, and arrogant.

Botched InAq spells generally provide false information.

Level 1: Make a sense unaffected by water.

Level 2: Get an image of water within range.

Level 3: Get an image of water and its immediate surroundings within
range.

Learn the natural properties of a liquid.

Level 4: Learn the natural properties of a mixture of liquids.

Level 5: Learn the magical properties of a liquid.

Level 10: Learn the magical properties of a mixture of liquids.

Level 15: Speak with a natural body of water.

Level 20: Speak with an artificial body of water (like a fountain).

Intellego Aquam Spells

Level 5

Clear Sight of the Naiad

R: Per, D: Mom, T: Vision

You can see as clearly through water as through air, for a single
moment.

(Base 1, +4 Vision)

Subtle Taste of Poison and Purity

R: Per, D: Conc, T: Taste

You can taste all of the properties of any liquid or mixture of liquids.
Unlike *Touch of the Pearls,* you can use this sense on any number of
liquids during the duration of the spell, but you must taste the liquids
in question.

(Base 4, +1 Concentration)

Touch of the Pearls

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Tells you whether a liquid you hold or touch is poisonous, just as a
pearl sometimes does. Safer than *Subtle Taste of Poison and Purity,* as
you don\'t have to taste the possibly poisonous liquid.

In Verdan of Ex Miscellanea\'s version of the spell, poisonous liquids
turn a faint green. According to his sigil, all his spells involve the
color green.

(Base 4, +1 Touch)

Level 15

Call of the Rushing Waters

R: Arc, D: Conc, T: Ind

Allows you to find any natural body of water for which you have an
Arcane Connection (for example, a vial of water from it). Once you cast
the spell, you can hear the water while you concentrate. Following the
sound eventually brings you to the water, but you must make simple
Perception rolls against an Ease Factor of 6 to follow the sound
accurately (roll once per day for long journeys). If you break
concentration, you must cast the spell again. A body of water that does
not move or that makes little noise requires a roll against an Ease
Factor of 9 to be traced.

(Base 2, +4 Arcane Connection, +1 Concentration)

Level 25

Voice of the Lake

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

You can hold a conversation with a body of water. A body of water
usually knows about things directly in contact with it, such as boats
and fish. Genuine lakes are too complex for this spell to affect; they
are not Individuals of Aquam.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +1 Concentration)

Level 30

Enchantment of the Scrying Pool

R: Touch, D: Year, T: Ind, Ritual

Requisite: Imaginem

Turns a body of water into a scrying pool. Innately magical people
(including most companions with mystical powers) who look into the pool
can see any spot they know of that is within sight of some natural body
of water. The view you get is the same view that someone would have from
a low boat on the water --- either close to shore or far from shore, as
desired. Maximum range for scrying is 500 miles; the range of the spell
is the range to the pool when the spell is cast. This ritual is not
entirely of Hermetic magic, and does not conform to the normal InAq
guidelines. It is an old Mercurian ritual that has become known
throughout the Order, and which appears to use one body of water as an
Arcane Connection to any other body of water. A number of theoreticians
would like to make that work more generally, but so far this has not
proved possible.

(Special spell)

Muto Aquam Guidelines

You cannot transform liquids within someone\'s body unless the spell is
designed that way (and has a Corpus or Animal requisite).

Muto Aquam botches might change liquids inside the caster, change the
wrong liquid outside him, or change the liquid in the wrong way.

Poisons created at the guideline level have an Ease Factor of 3. For
every magnitude added to the spell, add three to the Ease Factor.

General: Change a liquid into a liquid that does +(Level) points of
damage on contact.

Convert part of a water elemental's body into another type of water
(salt water to fresh water, etc.), reducing the elemental's Might pool
by the level of the spell +2 magnitudes. If the elemental is not
destroyed by this effect, when the duration ends it can restore this
Might by re-absorbing the matter.

Level 2: Change a natural liquid into another natural liquid.

Change a liquid into a poison causing a Light Wound.

Level 3: Change a liquid into a poison causing a Medium Wound.

Change a natural liquid into a slightly unnatural liquid (for example,
make blue water or strawberry flavored castor oil), or vice versa.

Level 4: Change a liquid into an unrelated solid or gas (with
requisites; Terram for solids and Auram for gases).

Change a natural liquid into two or more different natural liquids, with
the two types separate (although they will mix again normally).

Change a liquid into a poison causing a Heavy Wound.

Change a liquid into a very unnatural liquid (for example, a shocking
pink liquid that causes bizarre hallucinations) --- requisites will
often be required.

Level 5: Change a liquid into a mixture of any liquid, solid (with
Terram requisite), or gas (with Auram requisite).

Change a liquid into a slightly unnatural solid or gas.

Change a liquid into a poison causing an Incapacitating Wound.

Level 10: Change a liquid into a very unnatural solid or gas.

Change a liquid into a poison causing a Fatal Wound.

Muto Aquam Spells

Level 15

Incantation of Putrid Wine

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Room

Makes all liquids within the target room vile, and malodorous. The room
where this spell is cast may not lose the stench for weeks or months.
Note that this spell only affects liquids that are in the room when it
is cast, and they remain malodorous even if removed from the room.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 Room)

Level 20

Lungs of the Fish

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

Requisites: Auram

Turns water into air as it enters your lungs, allowing you to breathe
water as you do air. This spell puzzles Hermetic theoreticians, as it
behaves like a dynamic container target despite not being a container
target. All known attempts to create analogous effects have failed, even
though analysis of this spell has not revealed any sign of non-Hermetic
influence, or integrated experimentation. Most magi just point to it as
an example of how Hermetic magic is not fully understood, and get on
with their lives.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part)

Level 45

Vile Water of Sterility

R: Touch, D: Year, T: Group, Ritual

Ruins a body of water up to the size of a small lake, making it unfit
for natural habitation and consumption. The water becomes dark and
murky, and noxious fumes emanate from it. Vegetation on the banks either
dies or becomes corrupt. Nearby trees become gnarled and blackened, and
land animals flee the area.

(Base 4 (a very unnatural liquid), +1 Touch, +4 Year, +2 Group, +2 size)

Perdo Aquam Guidelines

As magnitudes in these spells rise, the destruction caused becomes more
subtle, or more pervasive. Sigils commonly seen in Perdo Aquam spells
usually involve destruction in some specific way. Destroying water that
is part of something, such as the fluid in a human being, requires a
target of Part. Destroying water that is merely on someone, such as the
water making a person wet, only needs a target of Individual.

Perdo Aquam botches might destroy all water in the caster, as *Curse of
the Desert*, or create water instead of destroying it.

General: Destroy sufficient matter to reduce a water elemental's Might
Score by the level of the spell +2 magnitudes.

Level 4: Completely dry something (up to the size of a small house) that
is wet.

Level 5: Greatly reduce the amount of a liquid without destroying it
completely.

Level 10: Destroy a liquid (requisites may be required).

Level 15: Destroy one property of a liquid (like alcohol\'s ability to
intoxicate or sea water\'s saltiness).

Level 20: Destroy a small spring, so that it never flows again.

Perdo Aquam Spells

Level 5

Comfort of the Drenched Traveler

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Dries a person and his or her clothes.

(Base 4, +1 Touch)

Level 20

Parching Wind

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Part

Removes most of the water from any object, including plants (with a
Herbam requisite), possibly making the object brittle and fragile. With
a Corpus or Animal requisite, the spell can affect humans or animals.
This causes +10 damage, against which armor is no defense, and makes the
target extremely thirsty.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +1 Part)

Level 25

Closing the Earth\'s Gate

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Dries a single spring, so that it never flows again. This spell targets
the spring, not the water in it at a particular time, so the spring does
not start to flow again later.

(Base 20, +1 Touch)

Curse of the Desert

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Part

Removes virtually all the fluid from the target\'s body, doing +15
damage, which armor does not protect against. The target must drink
within a few minutes of being struck with this spell, or it dies.
Casting requisites are Animal for beasts, and Corpus for humans.

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +1 Part)

Level 50

Calling the Odious Drought

R: Touch, D: Year, T: Bound, Ritual

Requisites: Auram

Causes a drought over the surrounding area. Only one-tenth the normal
rain falls, streams dry up, and rivers dwindle.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +4 Year, +4 Boundary, no increase for requisite)

Rego Aquam Guidelines

Rego Aquam can change water into ice or steam, because these are both
states that water can have naturally.

Rego Aquam botches generally involve spectacular and dangerous loss of
control of the water.

Gen: Ward against beings associated with Aquam from one supernatural
realm (Divine, Faerie, Infernal, or Magic) with Might less than or equal
to the level of the spell. (Touch, Ring, Circle)

Level 1: Control a liquid in an extremely gentle way.

Level 3: Change a liquid into the corresponding solid or gas (for
example, change water into ice or steam). This does not require
requisites.

Level 4: Control a liquid in a forceful but calm way, such as a fast but
constant current.

Transport a liquid instantly up to 5 paces. Add 1 magnitude to increase
the distance to 50 paces, 2 magnitudes for 500 paces, 3 magnitudes for 1
league, 4 magnitudes for seven leagues, and 5 magnitudes to a place for
which you have an Arcane Connection.

Level 5: Ward against mundane water.

Control a liquid in a violent way.

Control a disembodied spirit associated with Aquam.

Completely control a water elemental.

Level 10: Control a liquid in an extremely violent way.

Level 15: Summon a disembodied spirit associated with Aquam.

Level 20: Ward against liquids. (Touch, Ring, Circle)

Add one magnitude if the controlled movement is slightly unnatural, two
if it is very unnatural.

Rego Aquam Spells

General

Ward Against Faeries of the Waters

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

No water faerie whose Faerie Might is equal to or less than the level of
the spell can affect those targeted by the spell. Faeries cannot
directly or indirectly break the magic circle, nor can they use ranged
attacks or magic to affect those within it.

Seen from certain angles at night, the ring appears as a light blue
dome.

(Base spell)

Level 5

Cloak of the Duck\'s Feathers

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Makes water run off one object or creature, protecting the target and
the target\'s apparel from dampness. The spell is broken if the target
is submerged in water.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 for slightly unnatural control)

Level 10

Break the Oncoming Wave

R: Per, D: Conc, T: Ind

Breaks all waves and torrents of water (including magical ones) just
before they touch you. The water either crashes to the ground or flows
around you in a truly impressive display.

In Ferramentum of Verditius\'s version of this spell, the water breaks
precisely one inch from the target, leaving a very clean line showing
where the waves stopped. All of his spells may be recognized by their
orderliness.

(Base 5, +1 Conc, ward, so the target is the warded Individual, not the
water)

Level 15

Breath of Winter

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

Turns a circle of water up to five paces across into snow. The Duration
ensures that it will not melt until the spell expires, no matter how
warm the weather.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part)

Push of the Gentle Wave

R: Voice, D: Conc T: Ind

A low wave is formed to propel a small boat slowly through the water.
When casting this spell, you commonly make a pushing gesture. This
spell, and other similar ones, pick out a particular current in the body
of water and make it behave as desired, and thus have Individual
Targets.

In Silva of Merinita\'s version of this spell, the wave occasionally
drifts or bobs about, as if it is happy and playful.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +1 Conc)

Level 30

Bridge of Frost

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Part

Causes a thick layer of frost (firm enough to walk on) to form on the
surface of a body of water. The frost can take any shape up to fifteen
paces in any direction.

In Cralian of Tremere\'s version of this spell, the frost is so crystal
clear that it can hardly be seen. All of his spells are very subtle.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +1 Part, +1 size, +1 to allow various shapes)

Chaos of the Angry Waves

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Part

Causes water to churn wildly, overturning small water craft and forcing
Swim rolls at --6, in a circular area 20 paces across.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +1 Conc, +1 Part, +1 size)

Parting the Waves

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Group

Parts a body of water, revealing a dry path 5 paces wide along the
bottom. Very large bodies of water are too large for the Group target,
and are thus unaffected.

(Base 10, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +2 Group)

Waves of Drowning and Smashing

R: Sight, D: Mom, T: Ind

Raises a wave 5 feet high and 30 paces wide, which can submerge
swimmers, overturn rowboats, and damage sailing ships. It starts as a
small, curved wave and grows for the first 10 paces, at which point it
reaches maximum size. If it travels 100 paces without striking an object
large enough to break it up, it dissipates.

(Base 10, +3 Sight, +1 size)

Level 35

Ice of Drowning

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Part

Turns part of the water in a circle 10 paces across into large, jagged
chunks of ice and drives them to pound against anything on the water\'s
surface. The ice can punch holes in small boats but does not damage
ships. Any swimmers in the area take +15 damage, and suffer --6 and two
extra botch checks on Swim rolls.

(Base 5 (for the violent pounding), +2 Voice, +1 Concentration, +1 Part,
+1 size, +1 additional effect, changing the water to ice)

Pull of the Watery Grave

R: Sight, D: Conc, T: Ind

Creates a strong undertow that pulls any object smaller than a rowboat
25 fathoms (150 feet) into the depths. Each of those caught in the
undercurrent must make a Strength + Swim stress roll against an Ease
Factor of 9 to avoid being dragged down. A roll is made each round that
the spell is maintained.

(Base 10, +3 Sight, +1 Conc, +1 size)

Tower of Whirling Water

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Group

From a large body of water you form a waterspout that moves under your
mental direction. It causes a simple die + 15 damage to anyone it hits
(no Attack roll necessary). In addition, those struck must make a
Quickness stress roll against an Ease Factor of 6 to avoid being sucked
up by the waterspout. Those who fail are helplessly pulled into the
spout and begin to drown immediately. When the waterspout fails, they
fall up to 20 feet to the water\'s surface. If you direct the waterspout
to move across land, you must make an Intelligence + Concentration
stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9 each round to maintain it.

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +1 Conc, +2 Group)

Level 40

Neptune\'s Wrath

R: Sight, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual

A gigantic wave is created in a very large body of water. The wave,
which is only 20 feet high but up to a mile wide, is capable of
capsizing ships at sea, smashing and drowning people near shore, and
seriously damaging coastline communities. The tidal wave needs 5 miles
of water surface to build itself up to proper proportions. The magus
cannot control the wave without casting another spell.

(Base 10, +3 Sight, +3 size, ritual for large effect)

Auram Spells

Auram spells are powerful because the element of air is ubiquitous.
Their weakness is that air is not usually violent, like fire, nor
strong, like earth. Auram, however, includes in its scope most weather
phenomena such as storms, lightning, rain, mist, and falling snow. Auram
spells usually affect air as phenomena (winds, odors) rather than as
gases.

Some target categories for Auram require some clarification. If the
normal descriptions apply, they can, of course, be used.

Individual: A single phenomenon: one cloud, one wind, one bolt of
lightning.

Group: Several related phenomena, such as the clouds, wind, and rain in
a storm.

A base Individual for Auram is a weather phenomenon that affects the
area within a standard Boundary --- an area one hundred paces across.

Creo Auram Guidelines

Weather phenomena are normally created at Sight range. This is because
most weather phenomena (clouds, rain, storms, and so on) naturally begin
in the upper air, and so spells to create weather must have enough Range
to reach this area. It is possible to create weather phenomena that
start at ground level, but they are often very unnatural, and the
increase in level for that precisely offsets the decrease from reducing
Range to Touch. A flying wizard could, of course, use Touch range to
create natural weather phenomena, but such spells are not very popular
in the Order.

Sigils in Creo Auram spells commonly give the air specific properties,
such as special scents or colors.

Creo Auram botches may create the wrong sort of weather, or create it
targeted at the caster or some other ally.

Level 1: Create a minor weather phenomenon: a breeze, a mist, a light
drizzle.

Level 2: Create a normal weather phenomenon: a cloud, wind, fog, rain
from a cloud that already exists.

Level 3: Create a severe weather phenomenon: deafening thunder, monsoon
rain, impenetrable fog, gale force wind.

Create a debilitating kind of air: noxious stench, mild poison, etc.

Level 5: Create a very severe weather phenomenon: hurricane force winds,
lightning strike, tornado.

Level 25: Create an air elemental from a base amount of elemental
material. (Ritual)

Create a phenomenon in a slightly unnatural fashion: +1 magnitude (for
example, indoors)

Create a phenomenon in a very unnatural fashion: +2 magnitudes

Create a phenomenon wholly divorced from its normal context (for
example, a lightning bolt springing from the caster\'s hands): +4
magnitudes

Creo Auram Spells

Level 5

Air\'s Ghostly Form

R: Touch, D: Diam, T: Ind

A thick fog forms around the magus, extending outwards for several
paces. A breeze can push the fog around. The fog dissipates at its
natural rate, and may be too thin to restrict sight within a minute.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +1 Diam, +1 unnatural (the spell can be cast
indoors))

Chamber of Spring Breezes

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Creates a breeze of fresh air that continually moves throughout a room,
keeping the air continuously breathable even if the room is airtight.
Rose of Jerbiton\'s version of this spell always causes the air to smell
of roses. The breeze can be created outdoors, but there it has little
effect.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 unnatural)

Level 10

Jupiter\'s Resounding Blow

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Creates a thunderclap; anyone directly underneath must make a Stamina
stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9 or be deafened. If deafened, the
target gets another Stamina simple roll each minute against the same
Ease Factor and recovers on a success. If the first roll botches, the
victim is rendered deaf for a month.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 unnatural (the spell functions indoors))

Stench of the Twenty Corpses

R: Voice, D: Diam, T: Ind

Creates a horrible stench of rotting corpses. All those within fifty
paces of the target point must make Stamina stress rolls against an Ease
Factor of 6 or act with a --3 penalty on all rolls. Anyone who botches
the roll vomits and is incapacitated for (10 -- Stamina) rounds.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Diam)

Wreaths of Foul Smoke

R: Voice, D: Diam, T: Ind

Thick, yellow, sulfurous smoke rises up from the spot you designate,
spreading and thinning naturally, but thick enough to block sight in a
radius of about five paces around the point of origin. For each round
anyone breathes the smoke, a Stamina stress roll against an Ease Factor
of 3 must be made or a Fatigue level is lost. Once a character is
Unconscious, further failed rolls result in the character taking a Light
Wound each time. The area where the spell is cast will be damaged: small
plants wilt and die, and tree growth is stunted. A faint stench of
sulfur clings for days to anything exposed to the smoke.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Diam)

Level 15

Broom of the Winds

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Whips up violent, swirling winds around the target. The target must make
a Size stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9 to remain standing. If
the target is braced or holding onto some support, he may also make a
Strength stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9. If both rolls fail,
the target is knocked in a random direction. The target may be damaged,
depending on whether he strikes anything.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 unnatural)

Charge of the Angry Winds

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

A wall of wind roars away from you, starting up to 10 paces away and
continuing until it dissipates naturally. The wind is confined by any
existing barriers, but if unconfined it can be up to a hundred paces
wide. All within the area must make a Dexterity + Size stress roll
against an Ease Factor of 9 or fall down and be blown along by the
winds. The rolls must be made at the start of the gale and each
subsequent round that the wind is maintained. You must concentrate on
the gale. Missile fire into or out of the gale is futile, and marching
against the gale requires a Strength + Size stress roll against an Ease
Factor of 15. Failure in this attempt mandates another Dexterity + Size
stress roll against an Ease Factor of 12 to keep from falling.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Conc, +1 unnatural)

Level 20

Circling Winds of Protection

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

Requisites: Rego

Surrounds you with winds that circle at great speed. Since the wind
picks up dust and other small, loose objects, you may be obscured.
Anyone standing near enough to attack you with a hand weapon must make a
Size stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9 at the beginning of each
round or be blown back. Melee Attack rolls against you are at --3, and
missile or thrown attacks are at --9.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +2 unnatural, +1 Rego effect)

Level 25

Clouds of Rain and Thunder

R: Sight, D: Conc, T: Group

Creates a small but severe rainstorm, including lightning and winds. The
storm gathers and breaks in a few seconds as the caster concentrates,
and dissipates with similar speed when he stops doing so.

Note that reducing the Range for this spell makes the storm increasingly
unnatural, so versions of this spell with lower Range still have the
same level.

(Base 3, +3 Sight, +1 Conc, +2 Group)

Clouds of Summer Snow

R: Sight, D: Conc, T: Group

Creates clouds that drop snow over an area about half a mile across. The
clouds gather over a few seconds at the beginning of the spell, and
dissipate over the same sort of time when the caster stops
concentrating. The spell does not affect temperature.

(Base 2, +3 Sight, +1 Conc, +2 Group, +1 Size)

Level 30

Pull of the Skybound Winds

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Makes winds rise upward, pulling one object, creature, or person up to
50 feet into the sky before letting that target drop. Even a small
building can be torn from its foundation, though such a building can be
no larger than 20 feet to a side, and cannot be built out of a material
heavier than stout wood. Uprooted objects fall randomly, unless you make
a Finesse stress roll against an Ease Factor of 12 to choose where the
objects will fall.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +1 Conc, +2 unnatural)

Wings of the Soaring Wind

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

Requisites: Rego

Generates a massive gust of air around you that supports and pushes you
along through the air at speeds up to 40 miles per hour. Hovering in
place is difficult, and requires a Finesse roll against an Ease Factor
of 9 per round. It is dangerous for extended travel, because if you lose
concentration, you are likely to sustain serious injuries (+15 damage,
on average, although it may be more if the magus was very high up).

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +2 highly unnatural, +1 Rego requisite)

Level 35

The Incantation of Lightning

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

A lightning bolt shoots forth from your outstretched hand in the
direction you are pointing, doing +30 damage to a single target it hits.
There must be nothing between you and the target. Those near the target
must make Size stress rolls against an Ease Factor of 6 to remain
standing.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +4 unnatural)

Level 40

Breath of the Open Sky

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind, Ritual

You can call up a wind capable of devastating the countryside. You must
stand under the open sky to cast this spell. While you cast the spell, a
breeze picks up, blowing from you in the direction you are facing. When
the ritual is completed, the wind strengthens to a gale roaring over the
visible countryside and beyond, strong enough to topple wooden
structures and knock down trees. The wind does not weaken while it is
within your sight, but loses its force naturally where you cannot see
it. If you turn away from your original facing for more than a few
seconds, you have to make a Concentration roll against an Ease Factor of
12 to maintain the spell. If you turn away for a minute or more, the
spell ends. The air behind you is still.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +4 size, +1 unnatural, ritual because of
spectacular effect)

Level 65

Wrath of Whirling Winds and Water

R: Sight, D: Sun, T: Group, Ritual

This spell creates an immense storm, 40 or more miles wide, of hurricane
intensity. The storm builds up while you cast the ritual, and dissipates
in a few seconds when the spell\'s duration ends. The gale-force winds
and lashing waves cause immense damage along shorelines, and the winds,
rain, and lightning cause extensive damage inland as well. Visibility is
reduced to a few paces, missile fire is futile, and travel is nearly
suicidal. Weak structures are blown over, and all but the most seaworthy
ships are certain to founder unless they can be beached before the storm
reaches full intensity.

The storm is not under the caster\'s control, and moves normally.

(Base 5, +3 Sight, +2 Sun, +2 Group, +5 size)

Intellego Auram Guidelines

Intellego Auram botches normally reveal false information.

Level 1: Make your senses unhindered by the air (for example, you can
hear over a howling wind).

Level 2: Sense one property of air (for example, determine if it is safe
to breathe).

Level 4: Learn all mundane properties of the air. Have an intuition
about some fact regarding the air.

Level 15: Speak with air.

Intellego Auram Spells

Level 15

Sailor\'s Foretaste of the Morrow

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Group

You know precisely what tomorrow\'s weather will be, and you gain a
general impression about the weather for the week ahead. This intuition
only applies to the place where you cast the spell, and is based on
extrapolating current conditions, so it is occasionally wrong (precise,
but inaccurate). Still, it would take something like an interfering
magical being, or a volcanic eruption, to throw the prediction off.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Group)

True Sight of the Air

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Vision

Lets you see clearly through all manner of obfuscation in the air
nearby, including smoke, fog, and dust, even if the obfuscation is
magical.

(Base 1, +2 Sun, +4 Vision)

Whispering Winds

R: Sight, D: Conc, T: Ind

The winds bear their tidings to your ears, allowing you to hear words
spoken by any group of people within your line of sight, provided no
solid barrier (including glass) intervenes. This spell is an adaptation
of an effect known to Bjornaer the Founder, and fits poorly into the
normal framework of Hermetic magic.

(Unique spell)

Level 25

Eyes of the Bat

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Hearing

You can move about confidently in complete darkness by sensing air and
its boundaries (for example, where solid objects are). You \'hear\' the
boundaries of the air, so it does not permit fine discriminations. On
the other hand, you can \'hear\' boundaries behind you.

(Base 4, +2 Sun, +3 Hearing)

Muto Auram Guidelines

Transforming only one property of air generally lowers the level by one
magnitude.

Muto Auram botches could change the caster temporarily into air, or
change the air in an undesirable way.

General: Transform air into a gas doing +level damage.

Convert part of an air elemental's body into another type of air (wind
to smoke, etc.), reducing the elemental's Might pool by the level of the
spell +2 magnitudes. If the elemental is not destroyed by this effect,
when the duration ends it can restore this Might by re-absorbing the
matter.

Level 3: Transform an amount of air into another form of air.

Level 4: Transform an amount of air into another element (fire, earth,
or water).

Transform a gas into a harmful gas causing a Light Wound (Stamina roll
against Ease Factor 6 to resist)

Level 5: Transform an amount of air into a mixture of elements.
Transform an amount of air into something slightly unnatural.

Transform a gas into a harmful gas causing a Medium Wound (Stamina roll
against Ease Factor 6 to resist)

Level 10: Transform an amount of air into something wholly unnatural.

Muto Auram Spells

Level 20

Rain of Stones

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

Requisites: Terram

Turns rain into stones as it falls, causing +0 damage every two rounds
(they\'re small stones), and maybe less if the rain is very light.
People under cover are not affected. The stones revert to water when the
spell expires. If it stops raining before the spell ends, no more rain
is transformed, even if a different rain storm starts.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +2 Sun)

Talons of the Winds

R: Voice, D: Diam, T: Ind

Requisites: Rego

Transforms a wind into an abrasive medium that tears and claws at
everything in its path. Soft materials like leaves and cloth are
shredded, and people take +4 damage from innumerable bloody cuts and
abrasions. This spell cannot be cast if there is not a breeze of some
sort blowing, thus making it difficult to use effectively indoors. The
caster is not affected by the spell, even if the wind is blowing
directly at him.

In Ossium of Bjornaer\'s version of this spell a strange keening can be
heard in the air as it cuts through targets. Ossium\'s wizard\'s sigil
manifests by making many of his spells eerie or frightening.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +1 Diam, +1 Rego requisite (additional effect:
protect the caster))

Level 40

Infernal Smoke of Death

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Turns normal smoke from a fire into a thick, corrosive cloud. Anyone
immersed in the cloud of smoke takes +25 corrosion damage, against which
armor provides only half its normal Protection value. Soft materials
like cloth, fur, paper, and leather are charred and ruined by exposure
to the noxious vapor. While you concentrate, any new smoke becomes
corrosive. The smoke is heavier than air, so rolls along the ground,
pooling in low spots. The damage represents normal exposure to the
vapor, and may be modified if characters spend unusually short or long
times within it.

(Base 25, +2 Voice, +1 Conc)

Level 45

Fog of Confusion

R: Touch, D: Year, T: Ind, Ritual

Requisites: Imaginem, Rego

Turns a bank of fog up to six miles across into a silvery mist too thick
to see through. Random screams, thumps, hisses, and other noises harass
and confuse anyone within the fog, perhaps even leading them into
danger. People have extreme difficulty navigating through the fog,
especially through unknown territory. No more than seven people, who
must be present at the ritual, can see normally through the fog. The fog
does not dissipate until the spell expires.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +4 Year, +4 Size, +1 Imaginem requisite, +1 Rego
requisite)

Level 50

Rain of Oil

R: Sight, D: Sun, T: Ind, Ritual

Requisites: Aquam

Turns rain into droplets of oil. Within the spell's duration, the rain
of oil continues as long as the storm does, drenching the landscape with
flammable liquid. The oil will evaporate at a natural rate after the
rain ceases. A Creo Ignem spell can ignite the storm so that the oil
burns as it falls, but this requires a Group target large enough to
catch all the raindrops. Lighting the oil after it has landed is much
easier.

(Base 4, +3 Sight, +2 Sun, +5 size)

Perdo Auram Guidelines

Causing the destruction of air with great precision raises the order of
magnitude by at least one level.

General: Destroy sufficient matter to reduce an air elemental's Might
Score by the level of the spell +2 magnitudes.

Level 3: Make air stuffy and poor for breathing.

Level 4: Destroy still air.

Destroy a minor weather phenomenon: a breeze, a mist, a light drizzle.

Reduce the intensity of a weather phenomenon by one step (for example,
from very severe to severe, or from normal to minor.)

Level 5: Destroy a normal weather phenomenon: a cloud, wind, fog, rain
from a cloud that already exists.

Level 10: Destroy a severe weather phenomenon: deafening thunder,
monsoon rain, impenetrable fog, gale force wind.

Destroy a debilitating kind of air: noxious stench, mild poison, etc.

Level 15: Destroy a very severe weather phenomenon: hurricane force
winds, lightning strike, tornado.

Perdo Auram Spells

Level 15

Room of Stale Air

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Room

Makes the air in a room stuffy and uncomfortable. Any creatures that
breathe air suffer a --3 penalty on all rolls involving physical
exertion. In addition, for each round of exertion a character must make
a simple Stamina roll against an Ease Factor of 6 or lose a Fatigue
level. This may cause panic in some creatures or people. The speed at
which the air refreshes itself depends on how well ventilated the room
is.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 Room)

Level 20

Quiet the Raging Winds

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Group

Stops all wind from blowing, leaving only calm air. This spell is not
powerful enough to affect winds caused by Ritual magic, and only affects
winds blowing on the caster when it is cast. Under normal circumstances,
the winds will not pick up again for at least an hour or so.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Group)

Level 45

The Cloudless Sky Returned

R: Sight, D: Mom, T: Group

This spell clears the sky within your vision of any clouds or other
meteorological activity short of a hurricane or tornado, either
naturally occurring or caused by magic. The clouds take a few seconds to
clear, during which time you must concentrate on them. This spell only
affects meteorological activity in progress at the moment of casting,
and is not powerful enough to dispel a weather condition caused by
Ritual magic.

In Ferramentum\'s version of this spell, the clouds clear from the sky
in an orderly manner, as if they were soldiers marching on parade.

(Base 10, +3 Sight, +2 Group, +2 size)

Rego Auram Guidelines

Rego Auram allows the maga to control existing weather phenomena. It is
not possible to create a breeze with Rego Auram, but it is possible to
direct the course of a storm. This includes starting and stopping the
rain at the maga\'s command.

Controlling an amount of air with great strength or great precision
raises the magnitude of the spell by one level.

Gen: Ward against beings associated with Auram from one supernatural
realm (Divine, Faerie, Infernal, or Magic) with Might less than or equal
to the level of the spell. (Touch, Ring, Circle)

Level 2: Control a minor weather phenomenon.

Level 3: Control a normal weather phenomenon.

Ward someone against a type of minor weather phenomenon.

Level 4: Control a severe weather phenomenon.

Ward someone against a type of normal weather phenomenon.

Level 5: Control a very severe weather phenomenon.

Control a disembodied spirit associated with Auram.

Completely control an air elemental.

Ward someone against a type of severe weather phenomenon.

Level 10: Ward someone against a type of very severe weather phenomenon.

Level 15: Summon a disembodied spirit associated with Auram.

Rego Auram Spells

General

Ward Against Faeries of the Air

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

As *Ward Against Faeries of the Water* (ReAq Gen), but for faeries of
the air. The faerie cannot directly or indirectly break the magic
circle, nor can they use ranged attacks or magic to affect those within
it. From some angles at night, the ring may be seen as a violet-hued
dome.

(Base effect)

Level 5

Wind at the Back

R: Touch, D: Spec, T: Ind

An existing breeze follows you until you stop traveling for more than
ten minutes. It causes phenomena you pass through (fog, haze) to follow
you.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Special (based on Concentration))

Level 10

Ward Against Rain

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

No rain falls on the caster, no matter how bad the weather.

(Base 4, +2 Sun)

Level 30

Clouds of Thunderous Might

R: Sight, D: Conc, T: Group

Gathers pre-existing clouds and winds into a small storm. The storm
gathers at a normal speed, but is under the caster\'s control as long as
he can see it. The caster may use the control granted by this spell to
dissipate small storms as well. If the caster does not dissipate the
storm before stopping concentrating, the storm continues as normal.

(Base 4, +3 Sight, +1 Conc, +2 Group)

Level 40

Gathering of the Stormy Might

R: Sight, D: Conc, T: Group

As for *Clouds of Thunderous Might*, but the storm is larger, possibly
covering the entire visible sky. Again, it is under the caster\'s
control.

(Base 4, +3 Sight, +1 Conc, +2 Group, +2 size)

Corpus Spells

Corpus spells deal with human or humanlike bodies and anything that
involves those bodies. Many faeries have enough in common with humans to
be affected by Corpus spells.

A base Individual for Corpus is an adult human being, up to Size +1.

Creo Corpus Guidelines

Many Creo Corpus spells are most useful as Ritual spells. Unless
otherwise noted, a healing spell cast other than as a Momentary Duration
Ritual actually suspends the healing process so that, upon the spell\'s
expiration, wounds are as fresh as they were when the spell was cast. No
Hermetic spell can restore Fatigue levels.

A spell that can heal something can also heal less serious versions of
the same thing. Thus, a spell that can heal Medium Wounds can also heal
Light Wounds. However, a spell to heal wounds cannot cure diseases, no
matter how high its level, and vice versa. Spells that give a bonus to
Recovery rolls work no matter what the character is recovering from.

The physical characteristics are Strength, Stamina, Dexterity, and
Quickness, and they can be affected and improved by Corpus magic.

Creo Corpus botches often inflict damage instead of healing it.

Creo Animal spells may be used as guidelines and examples for Creo
Corpus spells.

Level 1: Give a character a +1 bonus to Recovery rolls.

The target's wounds are treated as one category less serious for the
purposes of activities while injured.

Level 2: Give a character a +3 bonus to Recovery rolls.

Preserve a corpse from decay.

Level 3: Give a character a +6 bonus to Recovery rolls.

Prevent all of a target\'s wounds from getting any worse.

Level 4: Give a character a +9 bonus to Recovery rolls.

Level 5: Give a character a +12 bonus to Recovery rolls.

Create an entire human corpse.

Level 10: Give a character a +15 bonus to Recovery rolls.

Level 15: Heal a Light Wound.

Give a character a +18 bonus to Recovery rolls.

Resolve a minor aging crisis.

Level 20: Heal a Medium Wound.

Heal the debilitating after-effects of a disease, poison, or injury.

Resolve a serious aging crisis.

Level 25: Heal a Heavy Wound.

Improve all wounds by one level of severity.

Restore a lost limb.

Resolve a major aging crisis.

Level 30: Heal an Incapacitating Wound.

Increase one of a person\'s physical Characteristics by one point, to no
more than 0.

Cause a person to reach full physical maturity over the course of a
single day or night. This accelerated maturation only applies during the
spell\'s Duration, and thus full effect requires a Sun Duration spell
cast early in the day or night. People do not learn under the influence
of this spell, and for these purposes full maturity is reached around
the age of twenty.

Resolve a critical aging crisis.

Level 35: Heal all wounds.

Resolve a terminal aging crisis.

Increase one of a person\'s physical Characteristics by one point, to no
more than +1.

Level 40: Increase one of a person\'s physical Characteristics by one
point, to no more than +2.

Level 45: Increase one of a person\'s physical Characteristics by one
point, to no more than +3.

Level 50: Increase one of a person\'s physical Characteristics by one
point, to no more than +4.

Level 55: Increase one of a person\'s physical Characteristics by one
point, to no more than +5. Further increases are not natural to human
beings, and thus cannot be effected by Creo magic.

Level 70: Raise the dead, to a point. (See *The Shadow of Life
Renewed*.)

Creo Corpus Spells

Level 10

Bind Wound

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

This spell binds the target\'s wounds, so that he can undertake any
activity without the risk of worsening the wounds. He still suffers from
the wound penalties, however, and cannot heal naturally while under the
influence of this spell.

Typically, you place your hands on the target and pass them over his
wounds, which magically seal themselves and stop bleeding.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

Charm Against Putrefaction

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Ind

Prevents decay of a human corpse, or of a severed body part.
Necromancers use it to preserve their revived corpses.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +3 Moon)

Level 20

The Chirurgeon\'s Healing Touch

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual

This spell heals a single Light Wound suffered by the person touched.
This spell does not heal damage from poison or disease.

(Base 15, +1 Touch)

Gentle Touch of the Purified Body

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual

The target is cured of a Light Wound caused by poison or disease. This
spell does not heal damage caused by injury.

(Base 15, +1 Touch)

Purification of the Festering Wounds

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Ind

The target gains a +9 bonus to Recovery rolls, as long as he has been
under the influence of this spell for the whole of the recovery
interval. The recovery interval is counted from the time that the spell
is cast; any previous time is ignored.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +3 Moon)

Level 25

Restoration of the Defiled Body

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual

Removes the crippling or malignant after-effects of any injury, poison,
or disease, or of premature aging. The effects of natural aging cannot
be undone by this or any spell. This spell does not heal wounds, only
extra effects.

(Base 20, +1 Touch)

The Severed Limb Made Whole

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual

A limb that has been detached from the body can be reattached, but any
decay that has occurred on the severed limb remains after the limb is
reattached. After a day of decomposition, a limb is weak. After seven
days, it is nearly useless and infects the character on whom it is
replaced (Stamina stress roll against an Ease Factor of 6 or take a
Medium Wound). If it\'s been severed for more than two weeks, the limb
is completely useless.

(Base 25, +1 Touch, --1 because the old limb is needed)

Level 30

Cheating the Reaper

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual

Resolves a major (or less severe) crisis caused by aging. The target
still requires rest for the remainder of the season to recover fully.
Note that each application of this spell causes Warping. See page @@ for
details on crisis.

(Base 25, +1 Touch)

Level 40

Incantation of the Body Made Whole

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual

Heals all damage to a human body at the conclusion of the ritual. The
spell can only heal wounds, not such damage as missing limbs, or
diseases and damage from poisons.

(Base 35, +1 Touch)

Level 75

The Shadow of Life Renewed

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual

Requisites: Mentem

Brings the semblance of life to a corpse. During the ritual, healing
spells work on the corpse, which is important because the body must be
physically whole or else it simply dies again once it is brought back to
life. For each day that the person has been dead, roll for aging. When
the ritual is complete, roll a simple die to determine the success of
the attempt: 1: body dissolves; 2: body possessed by a demon, faerie, or
other supernatural entity; 3: mindless, useless living corpse; 4 or 5:
automaton with no Abilities over 3; 6 or 7: automaton, but Abilities as
a normal person\'s; 8: person with self direction but no personality,
and somehow dangerously demented; 9 or 10: person with will, but no
personality. In any case, the revived person is not truly alive and is
unable to gain experience points. Also, the person must make an aging
roll at the beginning of each year of its existence, regardless of age.
This is the closest that the Order has gotten to raising a person from
the dead.

(Base 70, +1 Touch, no addition for requisite)

Intellego Corpus Guidelines

Common sigils seen in Intellego Corpus spells usually report information
in some strange or quirky way.

Like most Intellego botches, Intellego Corpus botches normally provide
false information.

Level 3: Locate a person.

Level 4: Sense very general information about a body.

Level 5: Sense a specific piece of information about a body.

Speak with a dead body.

Level 10: Sense all useful information about a body.

Intellego Corpus Spells

General

Sight of the True Form

R: Per, D: Mom, T: Vision

You see the true, original form of any person whose form has been
changed or masked. This spell can see through mundane masks and
disguises at level 10, and can see through the effects of other spells
that are equal to or lower than the level of this spell.

(Variable base)

Level 5

Physician\'s Eye

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Determines the general health of a single person. Specific afflictions
appear to you as areas of yellow coloration on the person\'s body. A
Perception + Medicine stress roll is required to identify unusual
diseases. The Ease Factor is determined by the rarity of the disease.

(Base 4, +1 Touch)

Level 10

Revealed Flaws of Mortal Flesh

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

You are able to find any medical defects in a person or being that you
are touching. This provides more, and more specific, information than
*Physician\'s Eye*.

(Base 5, +1 Touch)

Level 15

Whispers Through the Black Gate

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

Requisites: Mentem

You can speak through the barrier --- the figurative \"gate\" --- that
stands between the dead and the living, to one corpse that has not yet
decayed into a skeleton. The corpse cannot have been buried in Church
burial, nor have belonged to a spirit that went straight to Heaven (for
example, a saint or a crusader). The spirit that you speak with is not
compelled to tell the truth; you can, of course, find ways to coerce or
trick it into doing so. All those around you can hear the voice of the
corpse.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, no cost for requisite)

Level 20

The Inexorable Search

R: Arc, D: Conc, T: Ind

Determines the location of a specific person. To cast the spell you need
a map and an Arcane Connection. After casting the spell, you can move
your finger over the map at the rate of one hour per square foot of map.
When your finger passes over the person\'s location as represented on
the map, you sense the person\'s presence. (If the person is not in the
area covered by the map, no sensations result.) You can locate the
person to within a thumb\'s width on the map. A similar spell allows you
to search for a dead body (*Tracing the Trail of Death\'s Stench*).

(Base 3, +4 Arc, +1 Conc)

Level 30

The Eye of the Sage

R: Arc, D: Conc, T: Ind

Requisites: Imaginem

Lets you see a specific person and what is within one pace of that
person. The image is clear enough to allow reading.

(Base 4, +4 Arc, +1 Conc, +1 requisite)

Muto Corpus Guidelines

These spells transform people. There are beneficial spells to cast on
yourself and your companions, and harmful spells to cast on your foes.

Transformations do not usually completely eradicate the original form;
something of the original remains. If you turn a fat, one-armed man into
a wolf, the wolf is fat, three-legged, and male.

Transformations can have subtle (or sometimes dramatic) permanent
effects. Someone who spends a month or more as an animal begins to act
and think like that animal. Eventually, weak-willed individuals might
lose their human identity altogether. When transformed back into a
human, the target might temporarily or permanently retain some feature
of the other shape. Someone turned into a rabbit and back might keep a
fondness for carrots or retain unnaturally big ears. Transformations are
tricky things.

Muto Corpus spells cannot alter a person\'s mind, so they leave the
transformed person\'s intelligence and knowledge intact. Magi can cast
spells while in animal form, but they suffer the normal --15 penalty for
casting without hands or voice. The transformed person gains any
abilities the animal form has though it may take a day or so of
experience to get used to using them.

To change accouterments along with the body involves requisites. For
example, you need a casting requisite of Animal for leather worn, Aquam
for any liquids carried, and Terram for metal objects worn (including
studs in armor). Accouterments are transformed only if they are actually
being worn, not if they are just being carried in the hand. Simply put,
equipment will not be transformed for one of two reasons: either because
you choose not to use the casting requisites or because the storyguide
rules that the equipment is not sufficiently part of the target\'s worn
equipment. This untransformed equipment falls to the ground.

Certain shapechanging spells allow the target to change back by
concentrating. While concentrating, you symbolically remove some item to
break the spell, such as a wolfskin cloak or some water in your hands.
These foci are essential if you are to be able to break the spell in
this way. If you cast the spell without them, you must either dispel the
magic with Perdo Vim, or wait for the duration to expire.

Muto Corpus botches may lead to a spell lasting indefinitely, and
proving hard to dispel.

Level 2: Change someone to give them a minor ability.

Level 3: Utterly change the appearance or size of a person (though they
must still remain human in form).

Change non-living human bone to have an unnatural property (requisites
may be needed).

Level 5: Make a body resistant to damage (+1 Soak).

Add or remove human body parts from the target in such a way that he no
longer looks human. These parts are normally functional, although a
spell may be deliberately designed so that they are not. The Target is
Part, not Individual (although Group and higher Targets work as normal).

Level 10: Turn a human into a land animal (with an Animal requisite).

Make a body resistant to damage (+2 Soak).

Level 15: Make a body resistant to damage (+3 Soak).

Level 20: Turn a human into a bird or a fish (Animal requisite).

Make a body resistant to damage (+4 Soak).

Level 25: Turn a human into a solid inanimate object (Terram requisite).

Make a body resistant to damage (+5 Soak).

Turn a human into a plant (Herbam requisite).

Level 30: Turn a human into an insubstantial object (Auram requisite).

Muto Corpus Spells

Level 5

Eyes of the Cat

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Requisites: Animal

The target gains the eyes of a cat, which allow him or her to see in
near darkness (but not in absolute darkness, such as a lightless
subterranean cavern).

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, requisite free)

Level 15

Disguise of the New Visage

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

The target\'s facial features are transformed to any approximately human
configuration you choose.

In Cralian of Tremere\'s version of this spell, the new visage is always
as unassuming as possible.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part)

Preternatural Growth and Shrinking

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Adds +1 to the target\'s normal Size or decreases it by up to 2 points.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 because the spell allows growth or two
kinds of shrinking)

Level 20

Arm of the Infant

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Part

Shrinks a person\'s arm to half its original length and makes it pudgy,
like an infant\'s.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +1 Part)

Level 25

Gift of the Bear\'s Fortitude

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

Your flesh becomes resistant to physical damage. You get +3 to your
Soak. Your flesh is tough and insensitive; any rolls that involve a
sensitive touch (such as for picking a lock) are at --1.

(Base 15, +2 Sun)

Shape of the Woodland Prowler

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Requisite: Animal

You place a wolf skin over yourself or another, and the target changes
into a wolf. The target may change back at will, ending the spell.
Before casting this spell, you must first, of course, acquire the skin
of a wolf, if you want to be able to end the spell early.

(Base 10, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

Level 30

Cloak of Black Feathers

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

Requisites: Animal

You hang a small cape of raven feathers on your back and transform into
a raven. You can resume human form at will, but doing so ends the spell.

(Base 20, +2 Sun)

Curse of Circe

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

Requisite: Animal

Turns a person into a pig.

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +2 Sun)

Level 35

Stance of the Patient Tree

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

Requisite: Herbam

You turn yourself into a tree about 12 feet high, with a trunk about a
foot thick. You can sense only the most basic things, such as night and
day, strong winds, and things that can affect a tree. You can resume
human form at will, but doing so ends the spell. While in tree form, you
do not heal any wounds or restore any Fatigue levels. The tree branch
you use to let yourself change back determines the kind of tree you
become, and you cannot cast the spell without the branch.

(Base 25, +2 Sun)

Level 40

Cloak of Mist

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

Requisites: Auram

You turn yourself into a thick, cohesive mist of approximately human
size. You can float through the air at walking speed and can see and
hear what is going on around you. You can also seep through cracks, but
cannot move through solid objects. You may return to human form at any
time, but doing so ends the spell. As mist, you are subject to the
forces of the wind. In order to cast this spell, you inhale some mist,
and you keep the mist in your \'mouth\' until you want to end the spell.

(Base 30, +2 Sun)

Transform to Water

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

Requisite: Aquam

You turn yourself into water, one pint for every pound of the your
weight. As water, you can hold yourself together unless someone makes an
effort to separate part of you from the rest. You can roll slowly across
the ground, but cannot move uphill. You can hear sounds, feel things
that touch you, and can sense temperature. You can resume human form at
will, but doing so ends the spell. You cannot resume human form if a
significant part of your body/water is separated from the rest. You pour
a small amount of water into your hands when you cast the spell.

(Base 30, +2 Sun)

Level 45

The Silent Vigil

R: Per, D: Moon, T: Ind

Requisite: Terram

You can move into and become part of a rock formation that is at least
twice your size. While in the stone, you can hear what is going on
around you, but you cannot use other senses. The spell lasts until you
come out, and you must come out where you went in. You have no need for
food or drink, though you do age. Rolls to recover from Fatigue or
wounds take twice as long to make while you are in the stone. Casting
requisites are required for items you take with you into the stone.

(Base 25, +3 Moon, +1 for special effect)

Level 60

Mists of Change

R: Voice, D: Sun & Year, T: Bound, Ritual

Requisites: Animal

As this spell is cast, a whipping wind arises and patches of mist begin
to roll across the landscape. Sometimes, a patch of mist suddenly
envelops a person for a few seconds, during which time the victim cannot
move. When the mist blows away, continuing its course, the person is
left transformed into a random creature. Roll a simple die to determine
the result: 1: Wolf, 2: Horse, 3: Brown Bear, 4: Large Toad, 5: Ferret,
6: Viper, 7: Boar/Sow, 8: Dog, 9: Cat, or 0: Other (storyguide picks; be
cruel). People transformed retain their human minds, but inherit all the
passions and instincts of their new forms.

The mist covers the target area, which must be in sight when you cast
the spell. The mists affect the area until sunrise or sunset, and
transform anyone who remains in the area during that time. For important
characters, roll a simple die when the spell is cast and every half hour
afterwards, and on a roll lower than the number of rolls made so far the
mists envelope and transform them at some point in the next half hour.
The transformations last for a Year.

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +4 Year, +4 Bound, slightly nonstandard effect, mist
and wind are cosmetic only)

Perdo Corpus Guidelines

These spells harm people directly, often permanently, unless outside
magics are used to repair the damage.

Diseases caused by magic have a base Ease Factor of 6. For every
magnitude by which the spell level increases, the Ease Factor increases
by 1. It is not possible to reduce the level by reducing the Ease
Factor. (See page @@)

Level 3: Do superficial damage to a body (for example, remove its hair).

Level 4: Cause a person pain, but do no real damage.

Level 5: Inflict a Light Wound.

Destroy a corpse.

Hamper a person without actually injuring them. For example, make them
lame, blur their eyesight. Heals as a Light Wound.

Level 10: Inflict a Medium Wound.

Cause the loss of a Fatigue level.

Level 15: Age someone by up to five years.

Cripple a limb, making it unusable (but still capable of healing). The
damage heals as a Medium Wound.

Destroy one of a person\'s minor senses. The damage heals as a Medium
Wound.

Inflict a Heavy Wound.

Level 20: Destroy one of a person\'s major senses. This damage heals as
a Heavy Wound.

Inflict a major disease.

Destroy or sever a limb, so that it cannot heal naturally.

Inflict an Incapacitating Wound.

Level 30: Kill a person.

Level 40: Destroy one property of a person, such as their weight or
solidity.

Perdo Corpus Spells

Level 5

Touch of the Goose Feather

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

The target lets out a loud sneeze. Spellcasters who sneeze must make
Intelligence + Concentration stress rolls against an Ease Factor of 12
to maintain concentration, and others get --1 on most activities at the
moment of the sneeze.

(Base 3, +2 Voice)

Level 15

Dust to Dust

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Turns a dead body or mindless undead body to dust in two rounds. The
spell doesn\'t affect those undead possessed by spirits. To do this to
an animal corpse requires a Perdo Animal spell.

(Base 5, +2 Voice)

The Wound that Weeps

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

When casting this spell, you point at the victim and a large wound opens
on his or her body. The wound is not a deep one, but it bleeds
profusely. This is only a Light Wound, but it looks bad.

(Base 5, +2 Voice)

Level 20

Invocation of Weariness

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

The target loses a Fatigue level. The phrases used with this spell are
usually singsong melodies, which lull the victim into drowsiness.

(Base 10, +2 Voice)

Level 25

Bane of the Decrepit Body

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

The target ages 5 years. Determine effects normally. This spell does not
work on children younger than age 16.

(Base 15, +2 Voice)

Curse of the Leprous Flesh

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

This spell inflicts leprosy on the target, which causes a person\'s
flesh to rot off in a matter of weeks --- a truly hideous sight. Much of
the target\'s flesh literally hangs from his or her frame, and there is
a pungent rotting smell about him at all times. The target takes an
Incapacitating Wound from the disease, and must roll as normal to
recover. The target also loses a point of Stamina by the time the
disease ends. If the victim somehow survives this curse, he is shunned
by mundane communities. If the victim succeeds in a Stamina roll against
an Ease Factor of 6 when the spell is cast, he shakes off the disease,
although he still feels unwell for a few days, and may have problems if
an astute doctor realizes he is leprous.

(Base 20, +1 Touch)

Grip of the Choking Hand

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

The target feels an invisible, strangling hand on the throat. Each
round, the target loses a Fatigue level. Once the target falls
unconscious, the spell has no further effect. The spell works by
seriously constricting the target\'s windpipe, hence the feeling. This
constriction is not quite enough to kill, however.

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +1 Conc)

Level 30

Incantation of the Milky Eyes

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Blinds a target, leaving the eyes milky with cataracts. This heals as a
Heavy Wound.

(Base 20, +2 Voice)

Twist of the Tongue

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Part

Twists the target\'s tongue into a spiral, completely destroying the
ability to speak. A grave offense to a magus. The damage heals as a
Medium Wound.

(Base 15, +2 Voice, +1 Part)

Level 40

Clenching Grasp of the Crushed Heart

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

When casting this spell, you make a clenching motion with your hand. The
victim doubles over and dies at once.

(Base 30, +2 Voice)

Level 45

The Kiss of Death

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

The person you kiss dies a sudden death. The only mark on the corpse is
the black imprint of your lips. You do not need to speak when casting
this spell, and thus gain no penalty from silence. (This is why the
spell is higher level than the guidelines would indicate.)

(Base 30, +1 Touch, +2 for no words)

Level 55

Curse of the Unportended Plague

R: Sight, D: Mom, T: Bound, Ritual

Starts a plague in a city or other Boundary. Everyone within the
boundary is afflicted with the disease when the ritual is complete, and
suffers as described under *Curse of the Leprous Flesh*, above. The
conditions causing the disease last but a moment, so people entering the
area after the spell is cast are safe. Using, or even transcribing, this
spell is rigorously discouraged by most of the Order of Hermes. (Note:
the disease caused by this spell is not the later Bubonic Plague, which
is unknown in Europe in 1220.)

(Base 20, +3 Sight, +4 Bound)

Rego Corpus Guidelines

Rego Corpus botches often take control of the caster\'s body, and move
it in ways he would not want.

Rego Corpus can be used to perform surgery. Detailed rules for surgery
can be found in *Art and Academe*.

General: Ward against creatures associated with Corpus from one realm
(Divine, Faerie, Infernal, or Magic) with a Might less than or equal to
the level of the spell. Note that Hermetic magi have no Might, and thus
are not affected by such spells. (Touch, Ring, Circle)

Level 2: Make a target lose control of a body part.

Level 3: Move a target slowly in one direction, as long as the surface
can support its weight.

Invoke a minor symptom of a disease without creating any underlying
malaise (e.g. rash, mild fever, cough)

Level 4: Control the large-scale physical movements of a target.

Move a target slowly in any direction you please.

Move a target slowly straight up, or in one direction over surfaces that
cannot support it.

Level 5: Hold a target\'s body motionless.

Invoke a major symptom of a disease without creating any underlying
malaise (e.g. vomiting, boils, paralysis)

Move a target slowly in any direction you please, even if the target is
unsupported.

Perform a trivial surgical procedure (inflicting a Fatigue level).

Control a disembodied spirit associated with Corpus.

Level 10: Control a target\'s motions.

Eliminate the penalties of Fatigue and wounds.

Animate a corpse.

Transport the target instantly up to 5 paces.

Perform a minor surgical procedure, inflicting a Light Wound or
preventing a Light Wound from worsening

Level 15: Direct the flow of bodily energy.

Move a target quickly in any direction you please, even if it is
unsupported.

Summon a disembodied spirit associated with Corpus.

Transport the target instantly up to 50 paces.

Ward a target against other human beings. Remember that, to ward off a
Hermetic magus, the ward must penetrate his Magic Resistance.

Perform a major surgical procedure, inflicting a Medium Wound or
preventing a Medium Wound from worsening.

Level 20: Transport the target instantly up to 500 paces.

Perform a critical surgical procedure, preventing a Heavy Wound from
worsening.

Level 25: Transport the target instantly up to one league.

Perform a life-saving surgical procedure, preventing an Incapacitating
or Fatal Wound from worsening.

Level 30: Transport the target instantly up to seven leagues.

Level 35: Transport the target instantly to a place you have an Arcane
Connection to.

Rego Corpus Spells

Level 5

Curse of the Unruly Tongue

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Causes the target to stutter and slur words. Communication rolls are at
--3. Spoken spells are at --6 to the spellcasting roll, and there is an
extra botch die.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +1 Conc)

Spasms of the Uncontrolled Hand

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

One of the target\'s hands spasms, causing him to drop anything he is
holding in it. It keeps spasming for as long as you concentrate.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +1 Conc)

Level 10

Rise of the Feathery Body

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

Allows the target to float vertically to any height, carrying up to 50
pounds, and rising as fast as smoke rises, slower if carrying a heavy
load. The target cannot move horizontally through this spell.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +1 Conc)

Level 15

Despair of the Quivering Manacles

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Your target shakes vigorously from side to side without falling. Those
affected get --3 on rolls requiring physical movement, and --1 to most
other rolls.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +1 Conc)

Endurance of the Berserkers

R: Per, D: Conc, T: Ind

Your body acts as though it were unwounded and unfatigued for as long as
you concentrate. Keep track of the actual Fatigue levels that the body
loses while \"berserk,\" because as soon as the spell wears off, you
lose those levels. If you run out of Fatigue levels, the spell
terminates immediately and you fall unconscious.

A character under the influence of this spell does risk worsening
wounds, but he may not notice.

(Base 10, +1 Conc)

Gift of the Frog\'s Legs

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Allows the target to leap up to 15 feet vertically or 25 feet
horizontally (2 feet less for every Encumbrance point). The person must
make a Dexterity -- Encumbrance stress roll against an Ease Factor of 0
to land without injury. A miss indicates that he takes a Light Wound,
and a botch indicates a Medium Wound. The target can only leap once for
each casting of the spell, and that leap must be made within ten
seconds. As with a frog\'s leap, a running start does not improve the
leap.

(Base 10, +1 Touch.)

Lifting the Dangling Puppet

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Lifts a person of Size +1 or less vertically into the air. Generally,
you can make the target rise or descend as fast as smoke rises, but a
heavier person rises more slowly and falls more quickly.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +1 Conc)

Level 20

The Gift of Vigor

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Transfers bodily energy from you to any target who is at a lower Fatigue
level than you. You are thus at the target\'s current Fatigue level, and
he or she assumes your previous level. If you lose a Fatigue level from
casting this spell, the loss comes after the transfer. Magi have long
looked for a way to restore their energy in order to cast more spells.
This is the closest they\'ve come.

(Base 15, +1 Touch)

Level 25

Awaken the Slumbering Corpse

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Causes a corpse to function at your verbal command. Commands have to be
very simple, like \"attack anyone who comes through here.\" The corpse
used cannot have been buried by Church ceremony.

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +1 Conc)

Strings of the Unwilling Marionette

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

You can control the physical movements of a person, such as walking,
standing, and turning. If the target resists the control, the movements
are jerky. The target can yell, but you can prevent intelligible speech
by controlling the target\'s mouth. The target must be conscious to be
moved about.

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +1 Conc)

Level 30

Seven-League Stride

R: Per, D: Mom, T: Ind

Transports you to any place within seven leagues either that you can see
or that you have an Arcane Connection with. If you fail an
Intelligence + Finesse stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9, your
arrival goes slightly awry. For instance, you might fall when you
appear, or just be facing the wrong way. A botch means you appear in the
wrong place, perhaps even in a wall.

Praefactus of Bonisagus\'s version of this spell always allows him to
appear in a safe, unembarrassing place (assuming he doesn\'t fail his
Finesse roll). All Praefactus\'s spells make him seem as dignified as
possible --- manifesting his wizard\'s sigil.

(Base 30)

Level 35

The Leap of Homecoming

R: Per, D: Mom, T: Ind

Transports you to any place to which you have an Arcane Connection. Most
magi use this to return to their laboratories.

(Base 35)

The Walking Corpse

R: Touch, D: Year, T: Ind, Ritual

Turns a corpse into a nearly mindless servant that can follow your
simple verbal commands faithfully but unimaginatively. Unless the corpse
is preserved with Charm Against Putrefaction or the equivalent, the body
decays normally, but even a skeleton can be animated.

(Base 10, +1 Touch, +4 Year)

Herbam

Herbam spells work on plants and plant matter, both living and dead.
Since wood is a common material in weapons, vehicles, and buildings,
Herbam spells can be useful in improving or destroying physical things.
They can also be used to bring the plant world to your aid.

A base Individual for Herbam is a plant roughly one pace in each
direction.

Creo Herbam Guidelines

These spells create and heal plants. Any food created is nutritious only
if the creation is a Ritual. The guideline levels given below are
generally for conjuring the leafy parts of plants.

Plants may be created living or dead with equal ease. To create treated
Herbam products (for example, cut timber, a vegetarian meal, or linen or
cotton cloth) add one magnitude to the level necessary to create the
equivalent amount of unworked living or dead plants. To create treated
and processed Herbam products (for example, clothes or furniture), add
two magnitudes.

A single spell generally only creates a single type of plant product.

Creo Herbam botches may create plants in the wrong place, or create the
wrong kind of plant.

Level 1: Ensure that a plant grows well for the duration of the spell.
This guideline can affect a plant up to ten paces in each direction; a
large tree. (That is, this guideline includes a +3 Size enhancement.)

Create a plant product (like a fruit or leaf).

Create a plant.

Prevent a plant from becoming sick.

Heal a Light Wound to a plant.

Level 2: Create a processed plant product, like a finished plank of
wood.

Preserve a dead plant from decay.

Heal a Medium Wound to a plant.

Level 3: Create wood in an unnatural shape, such as a living wall or
bridge.

Heal a Heavy Wound to a plant.

Level 4: Heal an Incapacitating Wound to a plant.

Level 5: Heal all Wounds to a plant.

Level 10: Heal all damage to a plant, including wounds, disease, and
poison.

Level 15: Bring a plant to maturity in a single day or night. The
accelerated growth only happens during the duration of the spell, so
full maturity requires a Sun duration spell cast soon after sunrise or
sunset.

Restore a manufactured wooden item that has been damaged to the peak of
its capabilities. This spell can also restore decay, but the damage must
be light.

Level 20: Bring a plant to maturity in about two hours.

Level 25: Bring a plant to maturity in about ten Diameters (twenty
minutes).

Level 30: Bring a plant to maturity in a single Diameter.

Level 40: Bring a plant to maturity in a moment.

Creo Herbam Spells

Level 5

Conjure the Sturdy Vine

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

Grows 10 paces of vine from a moderate quantity of wood, or from fertile
soil. The vine is extremely strong and pliable, suitable for use as
rope.

(Base 1, +2 Voice, +2 Sun)

Level 15

Trap of the Entwining Vines

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Group

Causes strong, woody vines to grow rapidly from fertile earth. The vines
cover a circle 2 paces across and reach 6 feet high. Anything caught
within them is immobilized. To avoid the vines, the target must make a
Quickness -- Encumbrance stress roll against and Ease Factor of 9. To
break out requires a Strength stress roll against an Ease Factor of 12
(allowed once a round). Someone not trapped can cut a trapped person
free in two rounds, assuming proper tools. The vines weaken and wither
to dust at sunrise or sunset.

(Base 1, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 Group)

Level 20

Bridge of Wood

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Creates a bridge made from living leaves, vines, and wood. The bridge
can reach up to 20 paces, and is five paces wide. It is sturdy enough to
support creatures of up to Size +4.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 size)

Wall of Thorns

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Group

Within seconds, this spell creates a straight wall of woody, thorny
bushes up to 20 paces long, 1 pace thick, and 4 paces high. The thorns,
which are unnaturally resilient, have a +15 Soak, are cut by edged
weapons only, and cutting through requires inflicting a Heavy Wound.
Bodily forcing one\'s way through the wall requires a Strength stress
roll against an Ease Factor of 9 and does +15 damage whether the attempt
succeeds or fails. If the roll botches, an additional 5 points of damage
are suffered. The wall grows out of existing bushes or fertile soil. An
Athletics stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9 allows a character to
scale the wall, but the character takes +10 damage in the process.

(Base 1, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 Group, +1 size)

Level 25

Wall of Living Wood

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

A straight wall of living oak is created, growing quickly from nearby
trees, other plant growth, or fertile earth. The wall is 20 paces long,
1 pace thick, and 5 paces high. It can be scaled with an Athletics
stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 size)

Level 35

The Bountiful Feast

R: Touch, D: Year, T: Special, Ritual

This ritual, which must be cast at noon on the day after the winter
solstice, attempts to ensure that all crops that grow within its target
will be healthy and fruitful. The spell protects against non-magical
blight and other diseases. It can\'t control the weather or prevent
others from harming crops, but it does cause crops to be healthier,
larger, and tastier than they otherwise would be. The target of this
spell is the fields owned by those present at the ritual. The spell must
be cast within the region affected by the spell, although that region
need not be contiguous. Although food plants are affected most by this
ritual, all plants are made healthier to some degree.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +4 Year, +4 Special (equivalent to Boundary), +1 Size
(for a total of +4 Size, including the +3 from the guideline, so that
the area affected is up to about 6 miles across)

Intellego Herbam Guidelines

As with most Intellego magic, Intellego Herbam botches generally give
false information.

Level 1: Gain an intuitive knowledge of a plant (for example, know
whether a given action would harm a plant).

Level 2: Locate a plant.

Level 3: Learn general information, or a single specific fact about a
plant or an item made from plant products.

Level 4: Learn all mundane properties of a plant or an item made from
plant products.

Level 15: Speak with a plant.

Intellego Herbam Spells

Level 4

Probe Nature\'s Hidden Lore

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Tells you what kind of plant you are touching. You also get an image of
it in its natural habitat. Works with plant products as well as with
plants themselves.

(Base 3, +1 Touch)

Level 5

Hunt for the Wild Herb

R: Per, D: Conc, T: Smell

When you cast this spell, you can smell one sort of plant, and follow
the scent, as long as you continue to concentrate. You must have a
sample of the type of plant you are looking for. A Perception stress
roll against an Ease Factor of 6 is needed to follow the scent. If there
is no plant of the relevant type fairly close by (close enough to
smell), you smell nothing, although the spell still works.

(Base 2, +1 Conc, +2 Smell)

Level 10

Intuition of the Forest

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Group

You engage in a type of communion with the woods that you are in, giving
you an intuitive sense of how to get along in the forest, and how to get
the most out of the forest without causing it harm. You get a +3 to all
nature-oriented rolls (not including spells) when in a forest or similar
area. Causing significant harm to the forest cancels this spell.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 Group)

Level 15

Shriek of the Impending Shafts

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Hearing

Lets you know where anything wooden will be in the immediate future by a
shriek that sounds in the air in advance of the wood\'s coming. A piece
of wood that is controlled may change course, so the spell is sometimes
wrong. You get a +9 bonus on Defense scores against wooden weapons
(provided that you have the freedom to dodge), and you can automatically
dodge wooden missiles fired from more than ten paces away.

The shriek is only audible to you, and it cannot be simulated by people
making noises.

(Base 2, +2 Sun, +3 Hearing)

Level 25

Converse with Plant and Tree

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

You can speak with a plant for one conversation. The level of
conversation depends on the type of plants; longer-lived and more noble
plants have more to say. A single question and response takes ten to
thirty minutes, with slower-growing plants speaking more slowly.
Typically, plants can talk about the soil and about other plants around
them, but have limited awareness of more momentary events, such as the
passing of animals or people, unless that passing has a direct bearing
on the plant (for example, a person cut its trunk). News can spread
quickly through a forest when it has to, called from tree to tree on the
wind. Bystanders cannot understand your conversation.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +1 Conc)

Muto Herbam Guidelines

These guidelines assume that when you change a plant, it\'s still a
plant in some way. Changing a plant into something else usually involves
a spell one level of magnitude higher than the guideline most
appropriate to the action. To change plants into treated or finished
material (for example, wooden furniture, a vegetarian meal, linen or
cotton cloth) add one magnitude to the level necessary to change plants
into natural, unworked plants.

Muto Herbam botches may turn the caster into a plant, or turn the target
into an animated plant hostile to the caster.

Level 3: Change a plant or item made from plant products.

Level 4: Change a plant or item made from plant products into metal or
stone (Terram requisite).

Awaken the consciousness of a plant (Mentem requisite).

Level 5: Cause a plant to bend or twist rapidly in place.

Muto Herbam Spells

Level 5

Pass the Unyielding Portal

R: Touch, D: Diam, T: Ind

Makes the wood of a door pliable, allowing the magus to bend it open
regardless of most locks or bars.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Diameter)

Level 10

Transformation of the Thorny Staff

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Causes a length of wood (up to 6 feet in length) to grow thick, sharp
thorns at whatever spots you touch. If the spell is cast on a staff, the
thorns add +4 to the damage done by the staff.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

Piercing Shaft of Wood

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Requisite: Rego

Turns a piece of wood into a sleek, barbed, strong shaft that flies
through the air at a target. Damage depends on the size of the item from
which the shaft is formed: staff (upper size limit) +10, 2-foot branch
+8, wand +5. This spell cannot miss, but it is resisted.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Rego effect)

Level 15

Rope of Bronze

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Requisite: Terram

Turns a piece of rope (made from plant material) into refined, superior
bronze, which does not break under normal circumstances.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, no cost for requisite)

Level 20

Thaumaturgical Transformation of Plants to Iron

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Requisite: Terram

Makes any plant, dead or alive, as hard as iron. Affects any amount of
continuous plant material up to the size of a small tree. Sharp-edged
plants can become deadly when they are made this hard.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 size, no cost for requisite)

Level 25

Stir the Slumbering Tree

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Requisite: Mentem

Raises any tree into a state of consciousness resembling that of a
human. Such a tree can see and hear what is going on around it, and at a
normal human level of perception. Such a tree may share some mental
attributes or personality traits with the caster. The tree can rearrange
its branches over the course of several hours, though too slowly for
people to observe the movement from second to second. Most trees in
magical areas are already awake.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 size)

Level 60

Curse of the Haunted Forest

R: Touch, D: Year, T: Group, Ritual

Requisite: Perdo

Turns a previously normal small forest into a haunted and dangerous
place. The trees become gnarled and hideous, and the imaginative can see
menacing faces in them. The trees also become conscious and cruel;
capable of sight, hearing, and limited movement. While they cannot
uproot themselves, they can move their branches about, and can reach the
ground in an hour or two. Only ill-tempered animals, such as boars and
crows, live in these woods, and nothing in them is edible. The only
knowledge of what might happen should this ritual be attempted in a
faerie forest comes from ancient and disputed legends of the Order of
Hermes.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +4 Year, +2 Group, +5 size)

Perdo Herbam Guidelines

These spells destroy plants and plant material. Since many items are
made of wood, these spells can be quite destructive. The guidelines
given are for destroying dead wood. Destroying live wood is usually a
bit harder --- add one magnitude.

Perdo Herbam botches normally destroy the wrong thing, possibly
including some of the caster\'s clothing.

Level 2: Cause the leaves to fall off a plant.

Level 3: Spoil an amount of food.

Level 4: Destroy an amount of dead wood.

Level 5: Destroy a plant.

Perdo Herbam Spells

Level 5

Curse of the Rotted Wood

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Causes a non-living wooden object to rot and fall apart. Objects up to
the size of a single door can be affected, but things that size take up
to two rounds to decay. Usually, large chunks of wood start falling off
the target, and slowly crumble to smaller and smaller pieces, until only
dust is left.

Ferramentum of Verditius\'s version of this spell is very orderly as per
his wizard\'s sigil. The decay of the object starts from the top and
continues to the bottom, leaving only dust as it goes.

(Base 4, +1 Touch)

Level 15

Wizard\'s Autumn

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Group

All the deciduous leaves (that is, those that normally fall in autumn)
on the target plants turn brown and then fall to the ground. The full
process takes a minute. This spell can affect a small grove of trees.
The trees do not bud again until the next spring.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Group, +2 size)

Level 20

Plant\'s Withering Bane

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Withers and destroys one living plant, up to and including a plant the
size of a small tree.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +1 size)

Level 25

The Great Rot

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Group

Rots and destroys a large amount of dead wood, up to the amount found in
a wooden house or small inn. Wooden structures creak and groan mightily
for about a minute before collapsing.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +2 Group, +1 size)

Level 30

Treading the Ashen Path

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Group

As you walk through a forest after casting this spell, all the plant
material 10 paces in front of you and 5 paces to either side withers and
dies. Trees are reduced to bare trunks, while their leaves and all
smaller plants turn to ash. You can walk for 7 miles with each casting
of this spell. Use of this spell in faerie woods is not recommended.
This spell was originally invented by a magus of House Flambeau, and he
was awarded a prize for it by his primus.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Group, +3 size, +1 fancy effect (the spell
effectively keeps being cast while the caster walks seven miles))

Rego Herbam Guidelines

It is equally easy to control living and dead wood.

Rego Herbam botches normally result in the wood doing something contrary
to what the caster wants.

General: Ward against beings associated with Herbam from one
supernatural realm (Divine, Faerie, Infernal, or Magic) with Might less
than or equal to the level of the spell. (Touch, Ring, Circle)

Level 3: Control an amount of wood.

Manipulate items made of plant products.

Level 4: Deflect a single attack by a wooden weapon.

Control an entire plant, moving it around as you direct, although it
remains rooted if it is a rooted plant.

Treat items made of plant products.

Level 5: Control an entire plant, moving it around as you direct, and it
need not remain rooted.

Control a disembodied spirit associated with Herbam.

Summon a mobile plant.

Treat and process items made of plant products.

Ward a plant against mundane plant diseases.

Level 10: Make a plant or thing made of plant products move with purpose
and intelligence, without requiring your constant control.

Transport a plant instantly up to 5 paces. Non-living plant products are
transported with Rego Terram. Add 1 magnitude to increase the distance
to 50 paces, 2 magnitudes for 500 paces, 3 magnitudes for 1 league, 4
magnitudes for seven leagues, and 5 magnitudes to a place for which you
have an Arcane Connection.

Level 15: Ward someone against mundane plant products.

Make a tree blossom out of season, in a moment.

Weave thread into a tunic.

Summon a disembodied spirit associated with Herbam.

Rego Herbam Spells

General

Ward Against Faeries of the Wood

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

Like *Ward Against Faeries of the Waters* (ReAq Gen), but for faeries of
the wood. At some angles, at night, the ring appears to be a green-hued
dome.

(Base effect)

Level 5

Dance of the Staves

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Causes a pole, staff, haft, or any other long, thin, non-living wooden
object to bend and lash about wildly for a few seconds and then stop
suddenly. A whirling staff strikes its holder and does +4 Damage, with a
possible bonus if the weapon at the head of the pole hits the person.

(Base 3, +2 Voice)

Level 10

Repel the Wooden Shafts

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Deflects a single blow of any weapon made of wood, up to the size of a
two-handed club. The attack automatically misses, but the attacker still
rolls to see if he or she botches (with two extra botch rolls for melee
weapons). If you ordinarily carry a wooden staff, it must be tossed
aside for the casting.

(Base 4, +2 Voice)

Level 15

Strike of the Angered Branch

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Part

Causes a large tree branch to swing at a target. The branch\'s Attack
score is equal to your Perception + Finesse. Damage is +10. You may
strike repeatedly with the branch, striking once per round for as long
as the spell lasts.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Conc, +1 Part)

Tangle of Wood and Thorns

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Takes a length of wood that you designate and hurls it at a target (a
Targeting roll is required). The wood wraps around and immobilizes the
target (assuming that there is enough wood), who must make a Strength
stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9 to break free (one attempt per
round). If the victim ever botches, he cannot escape without outside
help. If the length of wood has thorns, it does +6 damage when it hits,
and again each time the target tries to break free, whether successful
or not. When the caster stops concentrating, the target can escape on a
Strength roll against an Ease Factor of 6.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Conc, +1 Muto requisite)

Level 20

Coils of the Entangling Plants

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Group

Animates all the grass and small plants within a field delineated from
side to side by your outstretched arms and in front by no more than 15
paces of distance. The plants grab and wrap themselves around the people
nearest to them (Strength stress roll of 9+ to break free, rolled once
per minute). If a roll to break free ever botches, the victim cannot
escape on his or her own. With a Concentration roll of 6+, you can
release one individual a round.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Conc, +2 Group)

Level 25

Lord of the Trees

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Causes a tree to move its branches and bend its trunk in any way you
mentally direct. A large tree striking with branches has Initiative +5,
Attack +7, and Damage +10. Normal weapons are practically useless
against large trees.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +1 Conc, +2 size)

The Treacherous Spear

R: Voice, D: Diam, T: Ind

This spell animates a wooden or wooden-hafted melee weapon in someone
else\'s hand, and makes that weapon attack its holder until the wielder
is dead or the weapon is destroyed. When the spell is cast, the weapon
tries to break its wielder\'s hold (Quickness -- Encumbrance stress roll
against an Ease Factor of 9 to hang on). On subsequent rounds, the
wielder hangs on by making Strength stress rolls against an Ease Factor
of 6, allowed once per round. If a roll to hold on ever botches, the
wielder loses control of the weapon and is hit by it automatically (see
below). While still in its wielder\'s grip, the weapon does not strike
him or her, but does not strike on the wielder\'s behalf either. Once
the weapon breaks free or is released, it attacks its wielder, using his
Attack and Damage scores.

The former wielder may fight the rebellious weapon. The weapon uses its
defense rating as its Defense total. It has no Soak, and is \'killed\'
after it takes a wound depending on its size. One-handed weapons must
take a Medium Wound, while two-handed weapons must take a Heavy Wound.
The damage of thrusting and missile weapons is halved when attacking the
renegade weapon.

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +1 Diam)

Twist the Living Tree

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

You make a living tree bend into unusual positions. Depending on your
needs, you can make a cage, a shelter, or a wall. Even the leaves can be
commanded, maybe to form a solid roof that sheds rain. Takes one to ten
minutes to complete (depending on the complexity of the new shape),
during which time you must maintain concentration.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 size)

Ward Against Wood

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

The caster is protected from non-enchanted wood, so that none of it can
contact his body. If he is walking on a wooden surface, he is actually
suspended very slightly above it.

(Base 15, +2 Sun)

Level 30

Freeing the Striding Tree

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Like Lord of the Trees, above, but the tree can walk half as fast as a
human can. If you botch a Concentration roll to maintain control, the
tree attacks you, having been awakened and disturbed by this spell.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +1 Conc, +2 size)

Level 45

Calling the Council of the Trees

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Bound, Ritual

Requisite: Intellego

You call all magical and potentially mobile trees within the woodland
where you cast the ritual to the site of the ritual. The trees are
compelled to come, and will likely be interested in whoever has called
them. The attitude of the trees depends on the forest and the nature of
the one who called. Once gathered, the trees hold meetings, summon
ancient powers, and discuss the problems facing their kind. You may
speak, and understand what the trees are discussing. The results of the
conference may not be entirely in your favor. The trees remain animated
for a month and may seek to return home before the end of that period.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +3 Moon, +4 Bound, no cost for Intellego effect)

Ignem Spells

As fire is volatile and dangerous, so are these spells. Magi who pursue
the Art of fire do so with fine regard for the dangers and powers
involved, for fire is both dangerous and mighty, to friend and foe
alike. Storyguides should make Ignem botches particularly deadly.

Light and heat also fall within the domain of this Form. It\'s important
to remember that heat also includes relative absence of heat, so spells
that result in cold temperatures are possible through Ignem.

The base Individual for Ignem is a large campfire or the fire in the
hearth of a great hall. Fire damage is explained on page @@.

Creo Ignem Guidelines

Spells that create fires are versatile weapons --- destructive to living
things, undead, buildings, and morale. Those who depend on fire spells,
however, risk botching. Fire is an unforgiving element for those who
lose control of it, and self-incineration is always a possibility.

Typical sigils seen in Creo Ignem spells involve the flame being a
specific color or shape, or giving off an unusual smell.

Level 1: Create light equivalent to moonlight.

Level 2: Create light equivalent to candlelight.

Heat an object to be warm to the touch.

Ignite something extremely flammable (like oil or a wick).

Level 3: Create light equivalent to torchlight.

Heat an object to be hot to the touch.

Ignite something very flammable (like parchment).

Level 4: Create a fire doing +5 damage.

Create light as bright as a cloudy day.

Ignite something flammable (like dry wood or charcoal)

Heat an object enough to boil water.

Level 5: Create a fire doing +10 damage.

Create a fire doing +5 damage in an unnatural shape, such as in a ring
or sheet, or covering an item. (Purely cosmetic shapes are free.)

Create light as bright as direct sunlight on a clear day.

Ignite something slightly flammable (like leather or damp wood).

Heat an object enough to make it glow red-hot. This is hot enough to
melt tin or lead.

Level 10: Create a fire doing +15 damage.

Create a fire doing +10 damage in an unnatural shape.

Ignite something barely flammable (like a human body).

Heat an object enough to make it glow white-hot. This is hot enough to
melt almost all metals, and many rocks.

Level 15: Create a fire doing +20 damage.

Level 20: Create a fire doing +25 damage.

Create a fire doing +20 damage in an unnatural shape.

Level 25: Create a fire doing +30 damage.

Create a fire elemental from a base amount of elemental matter. (Ritual)

Creo Ignem Spells

Level 3

Moonbeam

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

Causes a gentle light, bright enough to read by, to shine down from
above and illuminate the area described by your encircled arms. Lasts as
long as you hold your arms in a circle.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +1 Conc)

Level 5

Palm of Flame

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

A flame leaps up in your palm, which must be upturned for the spell\'s
duration. The flame casts light like a torch, and can ignite very
flammable items. It does no damage, and does not burn the caster.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Conc)

Level 10

Heat of the Searing Forge

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Heats a piece of metal so that it is too hot to touch. Something the
size of a breastplate or helmet does +5 damage if in direct contact with
the skin for one round. For each additional round, more damage is done,
the amount dropping by two points each round (+3 damage on round two,
then +1). Smaller objects do less damage. Most metal armor has leather
or cloth underneath that gives the victim a +3 Soak bonus against the
heat.

(Base 4, +2 Voice)

Lamp Without Flame

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

This spell creates a steady light as bright as daylight on a cloudy day.
The light has no apparent source, but illuminates an area about ten
paces across, centered on a point indicated by the caster. This point
may be a mobile item.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +1 Conc)

Level 15

Blade of the Virulent Flame

R: Touch, D: Diameter, T: Ind

Forms a fire along the length of a metal blade. This flame doubles the
weapon damage score for the blade (or adds +5, whichever is greater),
and can start fires as well. If the spell is cast repeatedly on the same
blade, the blade gets hot enough to melt after half an hour, which ends
the spell. Letting the blade cool for half an hour between castings
avoids this.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +1 Diameter)

Flash of the Scarlet Flames

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

A brilliant red flash explodes in the air where you designate. If you
target a person\'s face the target needs a Stamina stress roll against
an Ease Factor of 9 to avoid temporary blindness. If the target botches
the roll, he is permanently blinded. If temporarily blinded, he can try
to make a simple Stamina roll against an Ease Factor of 9 each minute to
recover. The flash is equivalent to looking straight at the sun.

In Rose of Jerbiton\'s version of this spell, there is a faint odor of
roses in the area where the flash explodes.

(Base 5, +2 Voice)

Level 20

Pilum of Fire

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

A 2-foot, thick, spear-shaped jet of fire flies from your palms, doing
+15 damage to the individual it hits.

(Base 10, +2 Voice)

Level 25

Arc of Fiery Ribbons

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Group

A dozen multi-hued ribbons of flame leap from your hands and fly out as
far as your voice carries, covering a 60-degree arc. All those in the
arc take +10 damage.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +2 Group)

Coat of Flame

R: Voice, D: Diam, T: Ind

Requisites: Rego

The target is swathed in fire, and takes +5 damage every round while the
spell is in effect. That is, the damage must be rolled against Soak
twenty times during the spell. The Rego requisite ensures that the fire
does not spread.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +1 Diam, +1 Rego requisite)

Level 35

Ball of Abysmal Flame

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

A ball of flame shoots from your hand to strike a single target, doing
+30 damage.

Marius of Tremere\'s version of the spell causes the ball to make a loud
bang when it hits the target. His sigil is a gaudiness in his spells.

(Base 25, +2 Voice; the ball appearing to shoot from your hand is a
cosmetic effect)

Circle of Encompassing Flames

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Creates a circle of flames 6 feet high. The circle begins at a 1-pace
radius, but you can make it shrink to a pillar or grow to a 3-pace
radius as you concentrate if you cast with a Rego requisite. Anyone
moving through the flames takes +20 damage. You cannot move the center
of the circle.

(Base 20, +2 Voice, +1 Conc)

Intellego Ignem Guidelines

Intellego Ignem botches typically provide false information, although
they may also render the caster incapable of detecting heat or flames
for a time.

Level 1: Sense one property of a fire.

Locate a fire.

Level 2: Sense all mundane properties of a fire.

Become aware of all fires within the target area.

See a fire.

Sense levels of heat.

Level 3: Sense all mundane properties of ash.

Detect the traces of fires which burned within the last lunar month.

Level 4: See clearly through raging fire (an Auram requisite may be
necessary if smoke is present as well).

Learn the magical properties of a fire.

Level 10: See a fire and all things it illuminates (for example, see a
campfire and everything within its circle of light).

Level 20: Speak with a fire.

Intellego Ignem Spells

Level 5

Tales of the Ashes

R: Touch, D: Conc T: Ind

Lets you see what the ashes you touch originally were, and how and when
the object was burned. The latter two are divined from markings and
signs in the ashes.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Conc)

Level 15

Shadows of the Fires Past

R: Per, D: Mom, T: Vision

Allows you to see where fires have been in the past lunar month. A light
red flickering haze appears where the fire was, and you gain an
intuitive sense of when the fire was there. This spell does not look
into the past, but detects the traces of fire.

(Base 3, +4 Vision)

Level 20

Vision of Heat\'s Light

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Vision

Allows you to see the heat of objects that are of human body temperature
or hotter. Excellent for use in the dark, but it doesn\'t give true
vision. You can see well enough to use a weapon, even a missile weapon,
without penalty, but recognizing people is very difficult.

(Base 2, +2 Sun, +4 Vision)

Level 35

Eyes of the Flame

R: Arc, D: Conc, T: Ind

Lets you see a fire to which you have an Arcane Connection. You can also
see all those things which the fire illuminates.

(Base 10, +4 Arc, +1 Conc)

Words of the Flickering Flame

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Allows you to converse with a fire, commonly very chaotic and
distractible. Promising a fire more fuel might keep its interest. Fires
are mostly aware of what they\'ve burned, but they have a limited
awareness of what goes on around them as well.

(Base 20, +2 Voice, +1 Conc)

Muto Ignem Guidelines

The intensity of a fire also affects the difficulty of changing it. For
every five points by which the fire\'s damage exceeds +5, add one
magnitude to the level of the spell.

General: Convert part of a fire elemental's body into another type fire
(clear to sooty flame, etc.), reducing the elemental's Might pool by the
level of the spell +2 magnitudes. If the elemental is not destroyed by
this effect, when the duration ends it can restore this Might by
re-absorbing the matter.

Level 1: Change one characteristic of a fire within the target area (for
example, make a fire burn more brightly, or produce more smoke).

Level 2: Totally change a fire into another natural fire (changing any
or all of its characteristics).

Level 3: Change a fire so that it is slightly unnatural (for example,
make the flames colored, or make the smoke smell of roses). May require
requisites.

Level 4: Change a fire so that it is completely unnatural (for example,
multicolored flames that form images while the popping of the fire plays
music). Often requires requisites.

Level 5: Change a fire into a natural example of another element, with
an appropriate requisite.

Level 10: Change a fire into an unnatural example of another element,
with an appropriate requisite.

Muto Ignem Spells

Level 5

The Many-Hued Conflagration

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Makes a fire burn brightly in shifting colors for an instant. Each being
looking at the fire must make a Stamina stress roll against an Ease
Factor of 6 or be blinded for one round by the multicolored lights.

(Base 3, +2 Voice)

Level 10

Show of the Flames and Smoke

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Causes smoke of different colors, streams of flame, and strange popping
and sizzling noises to come from a fire. The effect is so spectacular
that onlookers are either entranced or horrified, depending on the
circumstances. The pyrotechnics might ignite nearby flammable objects
and cause minor burns to those within 2 paces of the fire.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Conc)

Hornet Fire

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Requisite: Rego

Turns a fire into a swarm of fireballs, each the size of a large insect,
that fly and harass at your command. Their burning touch gives one
person within range both a --3 penalty on all rolls and two extra botch
dice, but they do not cause actual damage.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +1 Conc, +1 Rego requisite)

Level 20

Prison of Flames

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

Turns a bonfire into a prison shaped like a miniature castle. A person
thrown into the middle is not burned, but takes +15 damage if he or she
tries to escape.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +1 Size)

Level 25

Trapping the Fire

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

Requisite: Terram

This spell turns the heat and flames of a large campfire into a small,
very hard object, such as a gem or a piece of metal. If the object is
broken, the flame returns, but dies if there is nothing to burn.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, requisite is free)

Level 35

Flames of Sculpted Ice

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

Requisite: Aquam

Turns a fire up to the size of a small house into ice. The ice forms
beautiful sculptures of leaping flame, until it begins to melt. When the
ice has melted halfway, the flames start again, but probably won\'t
spread, because of wet surroundings.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 size)

Perdo Ignem Guidelines

The intensity of a fire also affects the difficulty of destroying it.
For every five points by which the fire\'s damage exceeds +5, add one
magnitude to the level of the spell.

Perdo Ignem botches might create fire instead of destroying it, or
freeze the caster.

General: Destroy sufficient matter to reduce a fire elemental's Might
Score by the level of the spell +2 magnitudes.

Level 2: Greatly reduce the amount of light in an area.

Level 3: Completely extinguish all light in an area.

Reduce the size of a fire without destroying it completely.

Level 4: Extinguish a fire, cooling the ashes to merely warm.

Chill an object.

Chill a person so that they lose a Fatigue level.

Level 5: Strongly chill an object. (For example, freeze water.)

Chill a person so that they take +5 damage.

Level 10: Destroy one aspect of a fire (for example, heat or light).

Chill a person so strongly that they take +10 damage.

Perdo Ignem Spells

Level 10

Gloom of Evening

R: Touch, D: Diam, T: Room

The level of light in the target room drops substantially, making the
room gloomy, with deep shadows everywhere.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +1 Diam, +2 Room)

Winter\'s Icy Touch

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Causes the target to feel a chill and lose body heat. The target loses a
Fatigue level.

(Base 4, +2 Voice)

Level 20

Soothe the Raging Flames

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Eradicates the heat of a bonfire, which, however, continues to burn
until the fuel already covered in flame is consumed. The flames do not
spread, or harm anything beyond what they were already burning. If the
fire is extinguished and relit, it will burn hot again, as it is now a
different fire.

(Base 10, +2 Voice)

Level 25

Well Without Light

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Str

Removes light from the target structure. Only spells greater than level
25 can create light within this area. When casting this spell, magi
typically clench a hand into a fist, and the light flows into the fist
like a living entity, until the entire area is dark.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +3 Str)

Conjuration of the Indubitable Cold

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Part

Cools the air within ten paces of the target, leaving it slightly below
freezing. All nonliving things are chilled thoroughly, not just on the
surface. All living things (except you, if you cast with a Rego
requisite) lose one Fatigue level. House fires become as small as
campfires, bonfires become as small as torch fires, and campfires and
smaller fires go out.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +1 Part, +2 size)

Level 30

Wizard\'s Icy Grip

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Chills a single target so that it takes +20 damage. If this is enough to
kill, the target is frozen solid. Armor does not add to Soak against
this spell.

(Base 20, +2 Voice)

Level 35

Wizard\'s Eclipse

R: Touch, D: Diam, T: Bound, Ritual

The sun is eclipsed within the target area, making it as dark as night.
The darkness begins very suddenly --- the superstitious are likely to
panic, especially if they see that there is normal daylight just beyond
the boundary of the spell.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +1 Diam, +4 Bound, +3 size)

Rego Ignem Guidelines

The intensity of a fire also affects the difficulty of controlling it.
For every five points by which the fire\'s damage exceeds +5, add one
magnitude to the level of the spell.

Rego Ignem spells can control heat or light as well as fire.

Rego Ignem botches normally result in the fire doing exactly what the
caster does not want.

Gen: Ward against beings associated with Ignem from one supernatural
realm (Divine, Faerie, Infernal, or Magic) with Might less than or equal
to the level of the spell. (Touch, Ring, Circle)

Level 3: Control a fire in a natural fashion (for example, control its
direction of spread).

Move a fire quickly through space while leaving it burning naturally.

Transport a fire instantly up to 5 paces. Add 1 magnitude to increase
the distance to 50 paces, 2 magnitudes for 500 paces, 3 magnitudes for 1
league, 4 magnitudes for seven leagues, and 5 magnitudes to a place for
which you have an Arcane Connection.

Level 4: Control a fire in a slightly unnatural fashion (for example,
stop it from burning a person).

Level 5: Control a disembodied spirit associated with Ignem.

Completely control a fire elemental.

Level 10: Control a fire in a very unnatural fashion (for example,
fashion into a dancing humanoid shape).

Level 15: Summon a disembodied spirit associated with Ignem.

Ward against fire doing up to +5 damage. (Touch, Ring, Circle)

Level 20: Ward against fire doing up to +10 damage. (Touch, Ring,
Circle)

Level 25: Ward against fire doing up to +15 damage. (Touch, Ring,
Circle)

Level 30: Ward against fire doing up to +20 damage. (Touch, Ring,
Circle)

Level 35: Ward against fire doing up to +25 damage. (Touch, Ring,
Circle)

Level 40: Ward against fire doing up to +30 damage. (Touch, Ring,
Circle)

Rego Ignem Spells

Level 5

Tremulous Vault of the Torch\'s Flame

R: Voice, D: Mom T: Ind

Causes a fire to quiver a few seconds and then make a leap of up to 10
feet in any direction. A Targeting roll is required to hit a specific
target. The flame stays at the spot it hits if it can burn there (see
rules for fire damage on page @@). Otherwise, it simply scorches the
spot and goes out (doing +5 damage).

(Base 3, +2 Voice)

Level 10

Leap of the Fire

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Causes a bonfire to make a leap of up to 10 paces in any direction,
where it catches if there is fuel, or burns out if there is none. Make a
Targeting roll to hit a target; the flames do +10 damage.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 size)

Level 20

Light Shaft of the Night

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Group

Collects moonbeams and starlight into a single vertical shaft of soft,
silvery light that moves under your control. It illuminates an area 15
paces across with light nearly equal to sunlight (if the moon is out) or
moonlight (if the moon is not out). If the sky is overcast, the spell
does not work. Can only be cast under the night sky.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Conc, +2 Group)

Level 25

Burst of the Sweeping Flames

R: Sight, D: Mom, T: Ind

This spell causes a fire to explode outwards from its source along the
ground, as if a giant wind were blowing on it from above. The fire
travels for no more than 10 paces, but it ferociously ignites anything
in its path. The original fire is left dead, but in all probability a
number of new fires will be started. The flames cause +5 to +15 damage,
depending on the intensity of the original fire.

(Base 10 (4 + 2 magnitudes for the intensity of the fire), +3 Sight)

Ward Against Heat and Flames

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Keeps heat and fire at bay, unable to approach within a couple of inches
of the target. This renders the target immune to damage from flames or
heat of intensity less than that of molten iron. The target gets a +15
Soak against all fire-related damage. Any fire doing less than +15
damage per round doesn\'t penetrate the ward. Such fires simply dim at
the protected person\'s passing and flare back up after he or she is
gone.

(Base 4, +2 for up to +15 damage, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

Imaginem Spells

Imaginem is the Form of sensations and illusion. By using Imaginem, you
can alter what others perceive. Imaginem, however, means \"image,\" not
\"illusion.\" Thus, one creates, transforms, perceives, destroys, and
controls images, not necessarily illusions. A clairvoyance spell,
therefore, is Intellego Imaginem because it detects real images. By
manipulating sensations, however, you can create effective illusions.
The Art of Imaginem rewards the creative magus by fooling people into
actions they would otherwise shun: for instance, they might walk off a
cliff, while their eyes tell them there is a bridge over the chasm.
Imaginem cannot affect light, as that is part of Ignem, but it can
affect the things that light allows you to see.

Stenches and perfumes, tints and stains, color and shadow, melody and
cacophony, sweet and sour; all these are perceptions, and so can be
manipulated by the Art of Imaginem. An image works on the senses, not on
the mind, so an unthinking beast is as likely to believe an image as an
imaginative human. Similarly, everyone can sense an illusion created by
Imaginem magic. Nevertheless, Imaginem spells are still most effective
at fouling the communication on which human society depends. Beasts are
likely to be fooled by illusions, as are the simpler undead. Demons are
very hard to deceive, while faeries often see through illusions and
manipulate them to fool you in turn. Certain members of the Church have
proven remarkably adept at discerning truth from illusion, though the
talent is not dependable.

It is more difficult to mimic a specific object or person using an
Imaginem spell than it is to mimic a general image, and requires a
Perception + Finesse stress roll. For example, it is easier to imitate a
generic gold ring than it is to reproduce the gold ring with
inscriptions that the baron presented to his wife on the occasion of
their tenth wedding anniversary. The higher the roll, the better you can
fool people. You get a bonus to your roll for familiarity with what you
are mimicking (--3 for an unfamiliar object, +3 for highly familiar
objects or for having the subject available for modeling). For mimicking
people, a roll against an Ease Factor of 6 lets you fool acquaintances
of the person, an Ease Factor of 9 lets you fool friends, and an Ease
Factor of 12 lets you fool close friends and relatives. Use a similar
scale for mimicking objects. If you botch the Finesse roll, you may
think the image is satisfactory, but it\'s immediately seen through once
in use.

A base Individual for Imaginem is the equivalent of an adult human
being; whether a visual image of about that size, an auditory illusion
making that much noise, or whatever.

Creo Imaginem Guidelines

These spells create and restore images. It is important to note that
Creo Imaginem spells only create the images of things, not the things
themselves. An image of a bucket will not hold water poured into it, nor
will the image of a horse be able to carry a rider. This is often the
first (and most important) clue that the image is just an illusion. On
the other hand, the illusion of a wall may feel solid, but will present
no resistance if someone pushes a hand through it.

Increasing the complexity of a sensory perception, such as making a
moving visual image or making clear words instead of noise, adds an
additional level of magnitude. Making an image move or make noise at
your direction as you concentrate adds two levels of magnitude. In
addition, very intricate images (for example, an intricately ornamented
bridge) are generally one level of magnitude higher as well.

Wizard\'s sigils can be very obvious in Creo Imaginem spells. The
illusions commonly have some small quirk that marks them as belonging to
a certain magus. For example, illusions cast by Fortunatus of Jerbiton
often have some small religious icon worked into their structure, due to
the manner in which he invents his spells.

Creo Imaginem botches might create obvious illusions which are clearly
linked to the caster, thus marking him as a wizard.

Level 1: Create an image that affects a single sense.

Level 2: Create an image that affects two senses.

Level 3: Create an image that affects three senses.

Level 4: Create an image that affects four senses.

Level 5: Create an image that affects five senses.

Creo Imaginem Spells

Level 10

Phantasm of the Talking Head

R: Voice, D: Diam, T: Ind

Creates an illusory face on a wall or other flat object. The visage can
speak during the spell\'s duration. Individual wizards\' sigils can
produce very interesting differences in how the voice sounds, how the
face looks, and so on.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +1 Diam, +1 intelligible speech)

Level 20

Phantasmal Animal

R: Voice, D: Diam, T: Ind

Creates an image of any animal or beast up to the size of a pony (Size
+1). Under your direct mental command, it moves about (within range) and
makes appropriate noises. You need to be able to concentrate, and be
within range, whenever you wish to direct the illusion to move in some
manner. If you move out of range or stop concentrating, the illusion
just freezes in place. The image does smell like an animal, but it has
absolutely no effect on the sense of touch. Of course, a magus may not
use this spell to create the image of an animal he or she does not know
exists.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Diam, +2 move under your command)

Phantasmal Fire

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

Req: Ignem

Makes an image of a fire (up to the size of a large campfire) that
dances, illuminates, crackles, and (apparently) warms. It does not
spread, burn, or protect against cold. Makes a great joke at gatherings
of House Flambeau, although creating a real fire is even more popular.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +1 for light from Ignem requisite)

Level 25

Phantasm of the Human Form

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

Makes an image of a clothed and equipped person that can make noise.
Under your direct, unspoken command, the person can move about, speak,
and behave as a human does.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 move at your command, +1 intricacy)

Level 35

Haunt of the Living Ghost

R: Arc, D: Conc, T: Ind

Requisite: Intellego

With this spell, you can instantly project your own image and voice to
any designated spot that you have an Arcane Connection to (though
troupes may wish to limit this range to some absolute distance like 300
miles). You can see and hear through the image. The image must appear in
some medium, such as a fire, mirror, or pool.

Some magi use this spell to attend inter-covenant councils without
traveling the intervening distance. Because other magi can see you, this
spell is not held to constitute scrying by magic. Using it through
another covenant\'s Aegis counts as showing off, however.

(Base 2, +4 Arc, +1 Conc, +2 move at your command, +1 intricacy, +1
Intellego requisite)

Level 40

The Shadow of Human Life

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Requisite: Mentem

The human image created (as in *Phantasm of the Human Form*) has limited
freedom and simulated intellect. It functions as an independent human,
albeit a stupid one, capable of interpreting general orders in new
situations.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 intricacy, +6 Mentem requisite, for a very
elaborate effect)

Intellego Imaginem Guidelines

Generally, these spells have the least to do with illusions of all the
Imaginem spells, because one detects an image without altering or
controlling it. These spells improve upon your senses by bringing in
images (usually sounds and sights) not normally available.

Note that seeing or hearing into another room or a hundred miles away
does you no good if there is no light or sound there. As in CrIm spells,
each additional sense you wish to perceive increases the level of the
spell by one magnitude.

As with most Intellego magic, Intellego Imaginem botches normally give
false information.

General: Discern illusions caused by spells of equal or lower level than
the level of this spell (Vision target).

Level 1: Use one sense at a distance.

Memorize or perfect your memory about an image you have encountered.

Be able to discern your own false images.

Level 2: Use two senses at a distance.

Level 3: Use three senses at a distance.

Enhance one of your senses in one way (to see clearly at a distance, to
see small things, or to see in the dark, for example).

Level 4: Use four senses at a distance.

Level 5: Use all senses at a distance.

Intellego Imaginem Spells

General

Discern the Images of Truth and Falsehood

R: Per, D: Conc, T: Vision

You can tell whether an image has been created or altered through a
spell, seeing both the original and false images in the case of
alterations. This spell must be at least 1 magnitude higher than an
illusion in order to discern it. If you botch the spell, you mistake
illusions for the real thing and reality for illusion. Your discernment
is not limited to visual illusions, although you can only tell that a
sound is illusory if you are looking at the apparent source.

(Base effect, +1 Conc)

Level 5

Prying Eyes

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Room

You can see inside a room, as long as you can touch one of its walls. If
the room is unlit or poorly lit, you can only see as much as you could
if you were inside, but magical enhancements of your senses do apply.
You may change your viewpoint within the room throughout the duration of
the spell.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +2 Room)

Level 15

Discern Own Illusions

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Vision

This spell makes your own illusions appear largely transparent to you,
but still discernible.

(Base 1, +2 Sun, +4 Vision)

Level 20

The Ear for Distant Voices

R: Arc, D: Conc, T: Room

You can hear what is happening in the place you designate. You must have
an Arcane Connection with the place or with a person there.

(Base 1, +4 Arc, +1 Conc, +2 Room)

Level 25

Eyes of the Eagle

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Vision

You see distant things clearly. No matter how far away something is, you
can make out details as if it were only a foot or so from you. Things do
*not* all appear to be a foot away; you can simply make out details as
well as if they were. You can still judge distance accurately; in fact,
more accurately than normal, to within an inch or so at a distance of
several miles, since you can see as clearly as if you were judging
distance a foot away.

(Base 3, +2 Sun, +4 Vision)

Summoning the Distant Image

R: Arc, D: Conc, T: Room

You can see and hear what is happening in a distant place if you have
some sort of Arcane Connection to either the location or a person there.

(Base 2, +4 Arc, +1 Conc, +2 Room)

Muto Imaginem Guidelines

These are useful and powerful illusion spells, altering the visual
image, noises, smell, or taste of some object or being. The image
remains altered without your concentration and adapts itself
appropriately to the medium. The accuracy of duplication depends on your
knowledge of the subject. For instance, if you want to make a voice like
that of a specific person, you must be familiar with the voice that you
want to mimic. Those more familiar with the face, voice, body, or other
aspect being mimicked might see through an illusion by mundane means
(\"Duke Tybol, isn\'t your scar on your left cheek?\").

Muto Imaginem, or indeed other Imaginem magic, cannot overcome the
effects of The Gift, although it might offset them a little.

Muto Imaginem botches often change the caster\'s appearance in dangerous
or embarrassing ways.

Level 1: Change one sensation of an object (for example, make a leaf
look like a coin), but not its type (i.e. not from sight to sound).

Level 2: Change two sensations of an object.

Transform species that affect one sense into those that affect another.
(For example, transform audible species into visual species, so that
sounds can be seen.)

Level 3: Change three sensations of an object.

Level 4: Change four sensations of an object.

Level 5: Change the appearance of an object completely, in all things
except solidity.

Muto Imaginem Spells

Level 5

Taste of the Spices and Herbs

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

A setting\'s worth of food or drink tastes and smells exactly as you
designate.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

Level 10

Aura of Ennobled Presence

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

The target appears more forceful, authoritative, and believable.
Numerous subtle changes in appearance bring about this change, including
a slight supernatural illumination of the face, a more erect posture,
and a louder and smoother voice. The character gets a +3 on rolls to
influence, lead, or convince others.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

Notes of a Delightful Sound

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Room

Causes all sounds in a room, particularly music, to be especially clear
and sonorous. The notes are clearer, sharper, and more distinct.

(Base 1, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 Room)

Level 15

Disguise of the Transformed Image

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Makes someone look, sound, feel, and smell different, though at least
passably human.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

Level 20

Image Phantom

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Any one thing, including a living thing, can be made to appear as if it
were something else of approximately the same shape and size. The
illusion cannot be cast on things that have a shape or size improper to
the final appearance. If the target moves or is moved in such a way that
the illusion is inappropriate, it looks very strange indeed.

(Base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

Perdo Imaginem Guidelines

In addition to destroying created images, these spells dull the sensual
properties of things --- making wine tasteless, sneaks silent, and magi
invisible. Destroying changing images is more difficult --- add one
level of magnitude to spells that do so.

Note that images are naturally generated constantly, so that a Perdo
Imaginem spell with Momentary duration merely makes an object seem to
flicker for a moment. Longer durations are required if the image is to
stay gone.

Note also that shadows are due to the physical body blocking the light.
Destroying something\'s shadow is thus Creo Ignem, or possibly Rego
Ignem, not Perdo Imaginem. Mirror images, however, are caused by the
species bouncing off the mirror, so a spell destroying (or changing) the
species also changes mirror images.

Perdo Imaginem botches might make the image more intense, or destroy the
wrong image.

Level 2: Destroy an object\'s ability to affect taste or touch.

Level 3: Destroy an object\'s ability to affect smell or hearing.

Destroy an object\'s ability to affect taste and touch.

Level 4: Destroy an object\'s ability to affect sight.

Destroy an object\'s ability to affect any three of taste, touch, smell,
or hearing.

Level 5: Destroy an object\'s ability to affect any four senses.

Level 10: Destroy an object\'s ability to affect all five senses.

Perdo Imaginem Spells

General

Dispel the Phantom Image

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Destroys the image from any one CrIm spell whose level you match or
exceed on a stress die + the level of your spell.

(Base effect)

Level 5

Taste of the Dulled Tongue

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Hides the taste of any substance, liquid or solid.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

Level 10

Illusion of Cool Flames

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

A source of heat, such as a fire, seems to lose its heat and drop to the
surrounding temperature. It still, however, has its normal beneficial
and harmful effects (that is, glowing coals still cook meat or burn a
person\'s hand, though they do not feel hot).

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +2 Sun)

Level 15

Invisibility of the Standing Wizard

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

The target becomes invisible, but the spell is broken if the target
moves (aside from breathing and shifting slightly in place). He still
casts a shadow.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

Level 20

Veil of Invisibility

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

The target becomes completely undetectable to normal sight, regardless
of what it does, but still casts a shadow.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 changing image)

Level 20

Removal of the Conspicuous Sigil

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

Grooves, runes, writings, and similar markings are obscured so that they
are not visible, but the overall shape of the medium remains constant.
For example, runes carved into a sword blade can be made invisible,
making the sword appear normal.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part)

Silence of the Smothered Sound

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

Makes one being or object incapable of producing sound. Magi who cannot
utter their magic words suffer the normal penalties to their
spellcasting rolls.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +1 changing image)

Level 25

Chamber of Invisibility

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Group

Causes a Group of creatures to become invisible. Any affected character
who moves or is touched makes everyone visible. All members of the Group
still cast shadows.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 Group)

Rego Imaginem Guidelines

These spells make things appear to be somewhere other than where they
actually are. As with CrIm and PeIm, it is slightly harder to affect
changing images. Add one level of magnitude to spells that do so. Add a
further level of magnitude if the image is to change along with the
object. Add one level of magnitude to the guidelines for each additional
sense to be affected.

Rego Imaginem botches might control the wrong image, or do something
completely inappropriate to the targeted image.

General: Ward against beings associated with Imaginem from one
supernatural realm (Divine, Faerie, Infernal, or Magic) with Might less
than or equal to the level of the spell. (Touch, Ring, Circle)

Level 2: Make an object appear (to one sense) to be up to one pace away
from its actual position.

Level 3: Make an object appear (to one sense) to be up to five paces
away from its actual position.

Make objects appear to move rapidly in a disorientating way.

Level 4: Make an object appear (to one sense) to be up to fifteen paces
from its actual position.

Make an object appear (to one sense) to be contained in or attached to
another object defined at the time of casting (for example, make
someone\'s voice appear to come from within a bag).

Level 5: Make an object appear (to one sense) to be up to one hundred
paces from its actual position.

Control a disembodied spirit associated with Imaginem.

Level 10: Make an object appear (to one sense) to be in Sight of its
actual position.

Level 15: Make an object appear (to one sense) to be in a location that
the caster has an Arcane Connection to.

Summon a disembodied spirit associated with Imaginem.

Rego Imaginem Spells

General

Restore the Moved Image

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Cancels a ReIm spell that moves an image, putting the image back where
it belongs, as long as you can match the spell\'s level on a stress
die + the level of your spell. This spell targets the image.

(Base effect)

Level 10

Illusion of the Shifted Image

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

Makes any person or object appear to be a pace away from its actual
position. The image cannot be placed in a solid object. As soon as the
original or image moves, the spell ends.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +2 Sun)

Wizard\'s Sidestep

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

Your image appears up to 1 pace from where you actually are, so attacks
aimed there are likely to miss you. Whenever the image is successfully
struck, it disappears and reappears in another spot.

In combat, early attacks are aimed at the image, and so automatically
miss you. Once the image has been hit once, you have a +9 bonus to
Defense, as attackers must try to find you in a fairly large area.

(Base 2, +2 Sun, +1 changing image, +1 moved image matches changes)

Level 30

The Captive Voice

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Part

Captures a person\'s voice and places it in a bag. The person may not
speak unless the bag is open, in which case the voice comes from the
bag, not the victim\'s mouth. If the victim screams while the bag is
shut, the bag vibrates visibly.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +1 Part, +1 changing image)

Confusion of the Insane Vibrations

R: Touch, D: Conc; T: Vision

The target of the spell sees everything vibrate back and forth at
varying high speeds. In addition, sounds are displaced and seem to come
from the wrong areas. Anyone trying to fight in these circumstances
suffers --3 on Attack and Defense scores, and must roll two extra botch
dice. The target is likely to become desperate and terribly confused.
Navigation is exceedingly difficult. The visual effects of this spell
are negated if the target is in complete darkness or if they close their
eyes.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +4 Vision, +1 additional senses)

Level 35

Image from the Wizard Torn

R: Per, D: Conc, T: Ind

Requisite: Intellego

Your image separates from your body. It can speak whatever you say and
do so in your voice, and you can see through its eyes. You must make an
Int + Concentration stress roll for each solid object the image passes
through and for each mile it travels. If you wish the image to be able
to leave your sight, you must use an Arcane Connection to yourself (for
example, a fingernail or a lock of hair) when you cast the spell. That
connection becomes an integral part of the image, and when the spell
ends, it falls to the ground wherever the image was located.

As your image is away from your body, you are invisible and silent at
your actual location. The image is your image, so while you may move it
in space you may not have it sit down if you are standing. Further, it
appears as if illuminated by whatever light is falling on you, no matter
what the level of illumination is at the image.

(Base 15, +1 Conc, +1 additional sense, +1 moving image, +1 Intellego
requisite)

Level 50

Illusion of the Misplaced Castle

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Bound, Ritual

Moves the image of any bounded structure or set of structures the size
of a castle or less up to one mile from its actual position.

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +4 Bound)

Mentem Spells

Mentem spells govern thoughts, emotions, and memories. Intelligent minds
are affected by Mentem spells, while the minds of beasts are affected
only by Animal spells and those of elementals, in so far as they have
them, by the appropriate elemental Form. The mental Characteristics are
Intelligence, Perception, Presence, and Communication, and they can be
affected by Mentem spells.

Since the effects of Mentem spells are not usually visible, they give
you a great deal of power when dealing with the common folk. Even spells
requiring eye contact are relatively inconspicuous when cast without
voice or gestures, but only powerful magi can cast spells this way in
the Dominion.

Minds do not have a size, so size modifiers do not apply to Mentem
effects with Individual targets. However, minds can be counted, so for
Groups you still need to boost the size to affect more people.
Similarly, Mentem spells affecting everyone in a Room, Structure, or
Boundary have size modifiers in the normal way.

Creo Mentem Guidelines

In addition to healing minds, these spells can also create thoughts,
emotions, and memories in another person\'s mind. These creations
interact normally with the target\'s other thoughts, and may be changed
in the process.

Typical sigils for Creo Mentem spells involve some small quirk in what
is created. A specific idea may lie in the background of all memories
created, for example.

Creo Mentem botches might create inappropriate emotions in the caster\'s
mind.

Level 3: Form words in another\'s mind.

Level 4: Put a thought or emotion into another\'s mind.

Restore a memory of a brief event to a fresh state, as long as a
fragment of it remains. The affected memory can be no more extensive
than a short conversation (two or three rounds).

Level 5: Create a memory in another\'s mind.

Restore a memory of an event to a fresh state, as long as a fragment of
it remains. The affected memory can be no more extensive than about two
minutes.

Level 10: Restore a memory of a day's events to a fresh state, as long
as a fragment of it remains. Events are remembered as if they had
occurred only an hour before.

Spark a twinge of conscience in an intelligent being's mind, overriding
the temporary obsession of a demon.

Level 30: Increase one of a person\'s mental Characteristics by one
point, to no more than 0.

Level 35: Increase one of a person\'s mental Characteristics by one
point, to no more than +1.

Level 40: Increase one of a person\'s mental Characteristics by one
point, to no more than +2.

Level 45: Increase one of a person\'s mental Characteristics by one
point, to no more than +3.

Level 50: Increase one of a person\'s mental Characteristics by one
point, to no more than +4.

Level 55: Increase one of a person\'s mental Characteristics by one
point, to no more than +5.

Creo Mentem Spells

Level 10

Words of the Unbroken Silence

R: Sight, D: Mom, T: Ind

Lets you say two words directly to the mind of a target. The target can
recognize your voice and knows that the message is of supernatural
origin.

(Base 3, +3 Sight)

Level 15

Panic of the Trembling Heart

R: Eye, D: Sun, T: Ind

Creates an overpowering fear in one person of a specific object, person,
or place.

(Base 4, +1 Eye, +2 Sun)

Rising Ire

R: Eye; D: Sun, T: Ind

Makes the target furious at someone or something of your choice. A
stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9 using an appropriate Personality
Trait (like Calm) can hold the anger in check, but it is felt strongly
regardless of the roll.

(Base 4, +1 Eye, +2 Sun)

Level 20

Memory of the Distant Dream

R: Eye; D: Sun, T: Ind

Inserts a full and complete memory into a person\'s mind. If the target
gives the memory some thought and concentration, and makes an
Intelligence roll against an Ease Factor of 9, the memory is revealed as
false. When the duration expires, the memory vanishes, although the
subject may remember remembering it.

(Base 5, +1 Eye, +2 Sun)

Pains of the Perpetual Worry

R: Eye; D: Moon, T: Ind

Gives someone a nagging, taunting, painful emotion --- a recurrent sense
of anxiety, a fear of something he or she does not know, a fear of
everything, and a fear of nothing. To have this spell cast on you is
truly a curse.

(Base 4, +1 Eye, +3 Moon)

Level 25

Weight of a Thousand Hells

R: Eye; D: Moon, T: Ind

Causes the victim to feel the despair, anguish, pain, and sorrow of a
thousand sinners in Hell. This is a horrible spell, for the victim loses
almost all motivation and earthly cares. All he can feel is his own
pain-endless, inexorable, and searing. Appropriate Personality Trait
rolls suffer a harmful adjustment of --5, and the target suffers --2 on
any rolls that require thought or concentration. The target has a strong
tendency to do nothing but brood.

(Base 4, +1 Eye, +3 Moon, +1 complex effect)

Level 35

Gift of Reason

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual

Permanently increases the target\'s Intelligence by 1 point, to no
higher than 0.

(Base 30, +1 Touch)

Intellego Mentem Guidelines

These spells are superb for cutting through the confusion of social
interaction and the endless banter of the rabble. The InAn spells that
deal with the mind may also be used for ideas and guidelines for this
section.

Note that writing does not contain any information of itself, and is
generally Animal and Herbam or Terram, for the materials, not Mentem. To
translate writing, you need someone who can read it, although you could
read the translation from their mind.

In general, a momentary Mentem spell can answer a single question,
although it is not necessary that the answer be expressible in a brief
form. A Momentary spell could, for example, tell you exactly how the
target felt about his father, no matter how complex the feeling, but it
wouldn\'t tell you why he felt that way. Finding out a lot of
information takes time.

Sigils for InMe spells usually involve information being transmitted in
unique ways.

Intellego Mentem botches normally supply false information.

Level 4: Sense the state of consciousness of one intelligent being (for
example, asleep, awake, meditating, dead, drugged, insane, or comatose).

Level 5: Sense a single emotion in a being.

Understand the meaning behind spoken sounds.

Level 10: Sense all of the emotions in a being.

Discover the truth of a statement.

Level 15: Speak with any one human.

Read a person\'s surface thoughts.

Pick a single answer from the mind of a target.

Level 20: Read the last day\'s memories from one person.

Level 25: Learn all the information you wish from a person\'s mind.

Intellego Mentem Spells

Level 10

Sight of the Transparent Motive

R: Eye; D: Mom, T: Ind

Detects the general motive most powerfully influencing the target at the
moment. General motives are such things as fear, anger, and greed, not
specific things like the desire to look good before one\'s superiors.

(Base 5, +1 Eye)

Level 15

Perception of the Conflicting Motives

R: Eye, D: Mom, T: Ind

You can detect the conflicting motives behind one target\'s actions.
Thus you might learn that a guard feels conflict between fear and duty.
This spell is often used before application of a Muto or Rego spell,
since it is usually easier to change a target\'s emotions after you\'ve
sensed them than it is to create emotions.

(Base 10, +1 Eye)

Level 20

Frosty Breath of the Spoken Lie

R: Eye, D: Conc, T: Ind

For as long as you maintain this spell, the target exhales a misty
breath with each spoken lie. Small bits of ice form on the person\'s
lips if the lie is particularly severe. In winter, when breath is
visible anyway, lies produce a greater than normal amount of mist (the
mist actually billows out). A target who makes a Communication + Guile
stress roll against an Ease Factor of 15 can determine whether any given
statement will be taken by the spell as a lie. The spell can be defeated
through extensive and judicious application of Creo Auram and Perdo
Auram spells, and a demon is able to manipulate it in any way it wishes,
as demons are the embodiment of deception and are never caught in a lie
if they do not wish to be.

House Guernicus brought the Order this spell, and it is a very poor
Quaesitor who is without it.

(Base 10, +1 Eye, +1 Conc, mist is a purely cosmetic effect and thus is
free)

Posing the Silent Question

R: Eye, D: Mom, T: Ind

You can ask one silent mental question of the target, then detect the
answer. The truth of the answer is limited by the knowledge of the
target. Questions to the effect of \"What would you do if ...?\" often
receive inaccurate replies. You are likely to get what the target thinks
he would do, not necessarily what he would really do. The target of this
spell does not notice the questioning unless he or she resists the
spell, in which case they notice the attempt.

(Base 15, +1 Eye)

Level 25

Thoughts Within Babble

R: Per, D: Conc, T: Hearing

You can understand the speech of those within the target area.
Perception or Communication stress rolls are needed for difficult
exchanges. You also understand people who misuse a language that you do
speak; you know what they meant to say, as well as hearing what they
actually said.

(Base 5, +1 Conc, +3 Hearing)

Level 30

Peering into the Mortal Mind

R: Eye, D: Mom, T: Ind

You can thoroughly probe and understand the contents of the mind of the
target, including his or her immediate and long-term motives, personal
strengths and weaknesses, and other pertinent information.

(Base 25, +1 Eye)

Muto Mentem Guidelines

Muto Mentem spells give a mind properties it could not naturally
acquire. These fall into three main categories.

First, changing memories. While memories may decay over time, they do
not naturally change radically, so making them do so is Muto.

Second, emotions and thoughts that people cannot normally feel. This
includes the thoughts of animals and similar.

Third, non-mental properties. This covers making a mind physical, and is
very difficult.

Muto Mentem botches might change the mind of the caster, thus making
this magic potentially very risky.

While Intellego spells can grant magical senses to a single person,
granting a magical sense to multiple people is a function of Muto
Mentem. The base level is one magnitude higher than the level of an
Intellego spell to grant that sense at a Range of Personal and Duration
of Momentary, and the Muto Mentem spell has requisites of Intellego and
the appropriate Form or Forms. As for all base levels, this is for a
spell with Range Personal, Duration Momentary, and Target Individual.

Level 1: Make a minor change in a person\'s memory of an event.

Level 2: Make a major change to a person\'s memory of an event.

Level 3: Make a major change to a person\'s memory of a series of
events. Make a major change to a person\'s emotion.

Level 4: Make major changes to a person\'s memory of a period of their
life. Completely change a person\'s emotions.

Level 5: Turn a single memory or emotion into a solid object. (Requisite
of the Form of the shape.) The person whose memory or emotion was
transformed must be touching the item to feel the emotion or recall the
memory. Other people touching the object do not experience its mental
aspects.

Level 10: Completely rewrite a person\'s memories.

Level 15: Make a mind or spirit visible. (Imaginem requisite)

Utterly change a person\'s mind.

Level 25: Make a mind or spirit solid. (Requisite of the Form of the
shape.)

Muto Mentem Spells

Level 4

Recollection of Memories Never Quite Lived

R: Eye, D: Sun, T: Ind

Changes the target\'s memory of a detail into a similar, though
different, memory. The target is no more sure of this manufactured
memory than of the authentic one, so he may discover strange
fabrications to be false.

(Base 1, +1 Eye, +2 Sun)

Level 30

Mind of the Beast

R: Eye, D: Sun, T: Ind

Requisite: Animal

You turn the mind of the target into that of an animal of your choice.
The victim acts and thinks like that animal as much as possible; a
person who thinks he is a bird will try to fly, but will not be able to.
This can be dangerous for the target.

(Base 15, +1 Eye, +2 Sun)

Level 35

Past of Another

R: Eye, D: Year, T: Ind, Ritual

The target\'s memories are completely rewritten, and he is unable to
remember his actual life until the effect is dispelled or expires.

(Base 10, +1 Eye, +4 Year)

Level 40

Inmost Companion

R: Eye, D: Sun, T: Ind

Requisites: Animal

The target\'s mind is made physical as a bird. This bird normally stays
close to the target\'s body, but need not. If the target has Magic
Resistance, it protects both his body and mind, as normal. No matter how
far it travels, the target\'s mind controls his body, as well as the
bird\'s, as normal. In particular, it can see through both sets of sense
organs. If the bird is killed, the target also dies, as his mind has
been killed.

(Base 25, +1 Eye, +2 Sun)

Vision of the Haunting Spirits

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Room

Requisites: Imaginem

All spirits within the target area become visible, although they might
remain unseen if hiding behind something. This includes the spirits of
living people, which appear as the person normally does. If the person
is invisible or otherwise changed from his normal shape, his normal
appearance is superimposed on his current appearance.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 Room)

Perdo Mentem Guidelines

Emotions naturally reappear in a person, so spells that destroy them
must have a continuing duration to ensure that they do not come back.
Memories do not naturally return, so Momentary Duration spells remove
them forever, although a person could be told what he had forgotten, or
reconstruct the memory from things he does remember. A continuing spell
would prevent a person from relearning that information, however.

Perdo Mentem botches can destroy more than intended, or destroy elements
of the caster\'s mind.

Level 3: Remove a minor detail from a person\'s memory.

Level 4: Remove an important detail from a person\'s memory.

Diminish a single mental capability in a person.

Reduce the intensity of all of a person\'s emotions.

Level 5: Quell an emotion in a person.

Level 10: Remove a minor or short memory from a person\'s mind.

Reduce all of a person\'s mental capabilities.

Level 15: Remove a major or long memory from a person\'s mind.

Remove all emotions from a person.

Drive a person insane.

Level 25: Leave a person a mindless husk.

Perdo Mentem Spells

General

Lay to Rest the Haunting Spirit

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

If your spell Penetrates the resistance of a ghost or similar spirit, it
loses a number of points from its Might equal to the level of this
spell. If this reduces the spirit\'s Might to zero, it vanishes,
apparently destroyed. Philosophers concur that the spirit goes to the
afterlife, or is perhaps weakened to helplessness, but is not actually
destroyed. Souls, after all, are immortal.

(Base effect)

Level 5

Tip of the Tongue

R: Eye, D: Diam, T: Ind

Causes the target to forget one word of your choosing. The target cannot
remember that word for the spell\'s duration, but afterwards he can come
up with the word without assistance by making an Intelligence +
Concentration stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9. If the target
fails he may try again, but each additional roll adds +1 to the
difficulty.

(Base 3, +1 Eye, +1 Diam)

Level 10

Trust of Childlike Faith

R: Eye, D: Diam, T: Ind

The target loses judgment and believes almost any passable lie for the
duration of the spell. An Intelligence stress roll against an Ease
Factor of 6 is allowed to resist. Truly incredible lies allow easier
resistance rolls.

(Base 4, +1 Eye, +1 Diam)

Level 15

Calm the Motion of the Heart

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Removes one emotion from the target until it appears again naturally. An
angry person stops being angry, and a curious one stops being
inquisitive. Many a magus finds this spell useful for keeping his
apprentice\'s nose out of his immediate business.

(Base 5, +2 Voice)

Enchantment of Detachment

R: Eye, D: Sun, T: Ind

Calms and greatly lowers the intensity of the target\'s current
emotions.

(Base 4, +1 Eye, +2 Sun)

Loss of But a Moment\'s Memory

R: Eye, D: Mom, T: Ind

Removes up to five continuous minutes from a target\'s memory, leaving a
blank. You target the loss of memory to a specific event or time. With
an Intelligence stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9, the target
realizes that memories of a certain period are missing. This Ease Factor
can change, depending on how important the missing memory is and what
sort of circumstances surrounded the event. Careful introspection over a
period of time can allow reconstruction of much of memory, but some
details are lost forever.

(Base 10, +1 Eye)

Level 25

Blessing of Childlike Bliss

R: Eye, D: Sun, T: Ind

Reduces an adult mind to a child\'s level. The target solves problems,
reasons, and expresses emotions as would a three-year-old. Magi affected
cannot cast spells. At first, anyway, the target is likely to be happy
at having lost a world of cares and troubles that are no longer
imaginable.

(Base 10, +1 Eye, +2 Sun)

Passion\'s Lost Feeling

R: Eye, D: Conc, T: Ind

The target is unable to feel any sort of emotion and acts listlessly,
without motivation or cares.

(Base 15, +1 Eye, +1 Conc)

Level 40

Black Whisper

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Ind

You whisper a magic sentence in the target\'s ear. It takes several
seconds to speak the sentence, so an unwilling, able-bodied target can
stop you. If you speak the whole sentence, the target must make a
Stamina stress roll against an Ease Factor of 15 or go completely
insane. You need not use your hands for this spell, but you must be able
to speak.

(Base 15, +1 Touch, +3 Moon, +1 for not needing to gesture)

Level 65

Poisoning the Will

R: Touch, D: Moon, T: Bound, Ritual

You curse a place, be it a valley, town, city, or covenant. The curse
gradually saps the will and vitality from the people there. They become
less energetic, and slowly stop caring about the place, what happens
there, other people, and finally themselves. Colors seem more drab and
the days longer, and there is an all-pervading sense of boredom and
lassitude. Strong-willed individuals and those with strong Personality
Traits are less affected, but still suffer to an extent. All Personality
Trait rolls while in the area suffer a --3 modifier. This spell affects
only those who are within the cursed area, including visitors to it.
Those who leave the area are overwhelmed by the return of their vigor
and sense of purpose.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +3 Moon, +4 Bound, +5 size)

Rego Mentem Guidelines

The Rego Animal spells that deal with the mind may also be used as good
guidelines for levels of Rego Mentem spells. Many changes to the mind
are Rego effects, because the mind could naturally assume that state.

Rego Mentem botches can change the target\'s mental state in the wrong
way, or change the state of mind of the caster.

General: Ward against beings associated with Mentem from one
supernatural realm (Divine, Faerie, Infernal, or Magic) with Might less
than or equal to the level of the spell. (Touch, Ring, Circle)

Ward against spirits belonging to one realm (Divine, Faerie, Infernal,
or Magic) with a Might less than or equal to the level of the spell.
(Touch, Ring, Circle)

Level 3: Make a subtle difference to the target\'s mental state.

Level 4: Control a target\'s mental state (for example, awake, asleep,
or confused)

Level 5: Control a natural emotion (for example, calm, fear). The target
must feel the emotion before you can control it.

Control a disembodied spirit associated with Mentem, such as most
ghosts.

Incline a person to a particular sort of response.

Level 10: Control an unnatural emotion (for example, cultivate a
person\'s feelings of bravery where he is usually cowardly).

Imbue all of a person\'s responses with a particular emotion.

Level 15: Control a person as long as you can see them.

Summon a disembodied spirit associated with Mentem, such as a ghost.

Level 20: Give a person one complex command, which he tries to carry out
to the best of his ability.

Level 25: Completely control a person\'s mind and emotions.

Rego Mentem Spells

General

Ring of Warding Against Spirits

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

Only ghosts and spirits with current Magic Might higher than the
spell\'s level can enter the ring you create. At certain angles, the
ring may be seen as an orange-hued dome. This spell does not affect
ghosts or spirits associated with the other realms.

(Base effect)

Level 10

The Call to Slumber

R: Voice D: Mom, T: Ind

The target becomes sleepy and falls asleep within a few seconds.

(Base 4, +2 Voice)

Snap of Awakening

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

When you snap your fingers you instantly awaken the target from sleep to
alert consciousness. Does not work on someone unconscious from
Fatigue-level loss, wounds, or magic.

(Base 4, +2 Voice)

Level 15

Confusion of the Numbed Will

R: Eye, D: Sun, T: Ind

Confuses a person, who must make an Intelligence stress roll to take any
direct action. A roll of 12+ ends the spell, while a roll of 9+ lets the
character take the intended action, but the spell remains in effect. Any
lower roll means the character is confused and takes some other type of
action. When it is imperative for the victim to take an action, the
storyguide should allow an appropriate modifier to the roll. While under
this spell, a character always strikes last in combat and gets at least
a --1 on all attacking and defending rolls.

(Base 4, +1 Eye, +2 Sun)

Level 20

Aura of Rightful Authority

R: Eye, D: Sun, T: Ind

The target of the spell is strongly inclined to obey you, as if you were
his natural superior.

(Base 5, +1 Eye, +2 Sun)

Coerce the Spirits of the Night

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Makes a ghost obey you as long as you can coerce it with threats, such
as a threat to defile its grave or to banish it to Hell. The more lurid
and dramatic the threat, the more cooperative the ghost is. If the spell
penetrates the ghost\'s Magic Resistance, roll Communication +
Leadership to see how effective your threats are. The storyguide should
always give a bonus or penalty that depends on the potency of the
threat, and any roll other than a botch will compel at least minimal
obedience.

(Base 5, +2 Voice, +1 Conc)

Scent of Peaceful Slumber

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Room

Everyone in the room falls asleep over a few seconds, with the smell of
lilacs in their nostrils.

(Base 4, +2 Voice, +2 Room)

Level 30

Visions of the Infernal Terrors

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

Causes everything the target sees to look and sound terrifying. The
world looks basically the same, save that everything is hideously
transformed somehow. The target must roll a stress die, adding his
Stamina and adding or subtracting an appropriate Personality Trait to
see what the effects are. The nature of the Personality Trait used
determines how it affects the Stamina roll. A Trait like Brave makes you
resistant to fear, while one like Cowardly reduces the result of your
roll.

Roll Result

0 or less Scared to death (literally)

1--5 Incapacitated with fear, permanent --1 to Stamina

6--9 Incapacitated with fear

10--15 Flee, fight at --6 if cornered or obstructed

16+ Carry on, --3 on all rolls

(Base 10, +2 Voice, +2 Sun)

Level 40

Enslave the Mortal Mind

R: Eye; D: Sun, T: Ind

Enables you to completely control the loyalty, emotions, desires,
interests, and activities of any person. People revert to normal when
the spell ends, and may be extremely angry with the magus.

(Base 25, +1 Eye, +2 Sun)

Incantation of Summoning the Dead

R: Arc, D: Conc, T: Ind, Ritual

Calls up a person\'s ghost. You must be on the spot where the person
died, or must have the corpse (either of these constitutes an Arcane
Connection). Alternatively, you can summon any ghost that haunts the
area you are in, if you know the ghost\'s full name, according to the
Law of Names. Those buried by Church ceremony and those have who gone
straight to heaven (that is, saints and crusaders, as opposed to the
normal folk who must wait for a time before going on) are not available
for summoning. This spell is a ritual because it can summon those who
are beyond the mortal world, as long as they are not in heaven.

If the ghost has Magic Resistance, you must penetrate that resistance in
order to summon it.

(Base 15, +4 Arc, +1 Conc)

The Shrouded Glen

R: Touch, D: Year, T: Bound, Ritual

Enchants the Boundary in which the ritual is cast so that anyone moving
through it is subtly diverted, effectively keeping some place within it
from being discovered accidentally. Anyone not actively searching for
the hidden place never finds it. Those actively searching can find the
place by making a Perception stress roll against an Ease Factor of 12
(allowed once per day). If the surrounding terrain is more difficult to
search than the average forest, the Ease Factor increases. Likewise, the
Ease Factor drops if the terrain is more open than a forest, and
completely open terrain is unsuitable for this spell. Once a searcher
spots the hidden place, the spell does not prevent approach. Those who
are present for the ritual are unaffected by the spell. This spell
mimics the properties of many faerie forests.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +4 Year, +4 Bound)

Level 55

Exchange of the Two Minds

R: Touch, D: Year, T: Group, Ritual

This spell switches the minds (but not the souls) of two creatures. A
new body greatly confuses those who are unprepared for the shock, and
even those who are ready take a day to adjust completely. Magi who
transport their own minds into younger, healthier bodies usually find
that having a strong body entails having powerful passions that
interfere with the clear thinking needed to pursue the magical Arts.
Both people involved must make a Stamina stress roll against an Ease
Factor of 3, rolled before the switch is made, to survive the transfer.
If only one person fails the roll, that person dies and the spell fails.
The other target is unaffected.

(Base 20, +1 Touch, +4 Year, +2 Group)

Terram Spells

Terram spells, in addition to covering earth, stone, clay, metal, and
glass, can sometimes affect inanimate objects in general. For instance,
*Wielding the Invisible Sling* (ReTe 10) throws all manner of nonliving
things.

Though Terram spells affect all manner of solid objects, it is harder to
affect certain materials: Here, in increasing order of difficulty, are
the materials Terram spells affect: earth (sand, dirt, mud), clay,
stone, glass, metal, gemstones. Each level of difficulty does not
necessarily represent an increase in one level of magnitude.

The base Individual for Terram depends on the material involved. For
sand, dirt, mud, clay, or similar substances, it is about ten cubic
paces of stuff. For stone, it is a single cubic pace. For base metals,
it is a cubic foot, while for precious metals it is a tenth of that. For
gemstones, the base individual is one cubic inch in size.

Creo Terram Guidelines

Creating earth in an elaborate shape or, with a Muto requisite, with
some unnatural property is one level of magnitude higher than the listed
guidelines.

Wizard\'s sigils commonly visible in Creo Terram spells involve the
object created being bizarre in some way, such as dirt being a specific
color or texture.

Creo Terram botches can entomb the caster in earth or stone, as well as
creating the wrong sort of material, or creating it in the wrong place.

Level 1: Create sand, dirt, mud, or clay.

Level 3: Create stone or glass.

Level 5: Create base metal.

Level 15: Create precious metal.

Repair a crafted item, returning it to an "as new" state.

Level 25: Create gemstone.

Create an earth elemental from a base amount of elemental matter.
(Ritual)

Creo Terram Spells

Level 15

Seal the Earth

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Group

Creates enough dirt to fill in a pit of up to 6 paces across and 3 paces
deep.

(Base 1, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 Group)

Level 20

Touch of Midas

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual

This spell creates a roughly spherical lump of gold about six inches
across. This weighs about eighty pounds, and is enough money to keep a
peasant family in comfort for about three hundred years.

(Base 15, +1 Touch)

Level 25

Wall of Protecting Stone

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

Makes a wall of granite up to 25 paces wide, 4 paces high, and 1 pace
thick. One needs miner\'s tools to break through it, though it can be
toppled if it is not connected to a support on its side or top.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 size)

Level 35

Conjuring the Mystic Tower

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual

An elaborately carved tower, formed from a single block of stone, rises
out of the ground. The tower stands 80 feet high and is 30 feet wide,
with a foundation set 20 feet into the ground. You determine the design
of the chambers within.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +4 size, +3 elaborate design)

Intellego Terram Guidelines

Intellego Terram spell levels are not affected by the material of the
thing affected, except as explicitly noted in the guidelines.

Intellego Terram botches normally provide false information.

Level 2: Learn one visible property of an object (a property that
someone with appropriate skills could determine just by looking).

Level 4: Learn one mundane property of an object.

See an object and its surroundings.

Level 5: Learn all components of a mixture or alloy.

Level 10: Learn all the natural properties of an object.

Level 15: Sense all the mundane properties of a composite object.

Level 20: Learn the magical properties of an object. Make your senses
unhindered by earth (for example, see right through a rock).

Speak with a natural rock (for example, a boulder).

Level 25: Speak with an artificial rock (for example, a statue).

Level 30: Commune with a natural rock. Speak with a metal object.

Level 35: Commune with an artificial rock (for example, a statue)

Level 40: Commune with a metal object (for example, a knife).

Intellego Terram Spells

Level 4

Probe for Pure Silver

R: Per, D: Mom, T: Smell

You can smell silver, and follow the scent.

(Base 2, +2 Smell)

Level 10

Eyes of the Eons

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Determines the age of any nonliving target to within 10% of its actual
age.

(Base 4, +2 Voice)

Level 15

Eyes of the Treacherous Terrain

R: Per, D: Conc, T: Vision

You can tell intuitively if any natural terrain you see is treacherous,
such as if a rock field is prone to sliding.

(Base 2, +1 Conc, +4 Vision)

Level 20

The Miner\'s Keen Eye

R: Per, D: Conc, T: Vision

You can see any one type of mineral (gold, diamond, sand), specified at
the time of casting, through up to 3 paces of intervening material. You
have a good idea of how much is there and how pure it is, if
appropriate.

(Base 2, +1 Conc, +4 Vision, +1 see through intervening material)

Level 25

Tracks of the Faerie Glow

R: Per, D: Conc, T: Vision

Causes even faintly perceptible tracks of a specific being to glow with
a faint magic light, making them stand out when you are within 30 paces
of them. The glow provides a bonus to Tracking rolls, which depends on
the relationship between the target being tracked and the terrain. If
the target is magically related to the terrain, +2; native to the
terrain, +4; neutral to the terrain, +6; inimical to the terrain, +8.
Tracking at night without a light source doubles the bonus. The more
faint the tracks are, the more dimly they glow, so the storyguide may
also modify the bonus based on the length of time since the target
passed.

(Base 4, +1 Conc, +4 Vision)

Level 30

Stone Tell of the Mind that Sits

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

Allows you to talk with natural stone. A stone\'s answers feel slow and
ponderous, but do not actually take any longer than a normal
conversation. Though a stone is usually willing to talk, its direction
sense and awareness of quickly moving things (such as people) are
limited.

(Base 20, +1 Touch, +1 Conc)

Level 30

Sense the Feet that Tread the Earth

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Part

You touch the earth and feel what is moving along the ground within a
mile of where you stand. You can tell the direction, distance, weight,
number, and manner of movement of moving things. For instance, you might
sense \"a single 50-stone creature slithering toward us, a hundred rods
in that direction.\" This spell is derived from the Terram tradition
from which Guernicus the Founder came, and does not fit well into
Hermetic theory.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +1 Part, +3 size)

Level 50

Dream of the Mind that Sits\
R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind\
Requisite: Creo\
Allows you to probe the memories of a spirit within a natural stone
object. The spell also perfects those memories. Probing the memories of
such a spirit is extremely slow. A typical session lasts between six and
twelve hours, during which the caster is oblivious to the outside world.
The spell allows the caster to perceive the memories of the spirit. The
spirit's senses are limited and slow, but its memory of them is very
long. Using this spell the caster can relive events witnessed by the
spirit, as it recalls them. Larger stone objects have more powerful
spirits and so have better perceptions. Precisely what level of detail
an individual spirit can perceive is up to the storyguide.

(Base 30, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Creo effect)

Muto Terram Guidelines

The targets below are for changing dirt. To change to or from sand, mud,
or clay, use the same level of magnitude as for dirt. To change to or
from stone or glass, add one level of magnitude. To change to or from
metal or gemstone, add two levels of magnitude. These adjustments only
apply once, so that changing metal to metal is only two magnitudes
higher.

The amount of material you can change is limited by the guidelines for
each end. Thus, you can turn a cubic pace of stone into a cubic inch of
gemstone with a base Individual.

Serious Muto Terram botches have a tendency to turn the caster to stone
or metal, but lesser botches transform the wrong thing, or transform
things in the wrong way.

General: Convert part of an earth elemental's body into another type of
earth (soil to dust, etc.), reducing the elemental's Might pool by the
level of the spell +2 magnitudes. If the elemental is not destroyed by
this effect, when the duration ends it can restore this Might by
re-absorbing the matter.

Level 1: Change one property of dirt.

Level 2: Change dirt to another type of natural earth (for example, sand
to loam).

Level 3: Change dirt so that it is slightly unnatural (requisites may be
required).

Change dirt into a liquid or gas (with requisites).

Change dirt to stone, or vice versa.

Level 4: Change dirt so that it is highly unnatural (requisites will
often be required).

Change dirt into a mixture of liquids, solids, and gases (with
requisites).

Change dirt into a plant (with requisites).

Make something grow to ten times its previous volume.

Level 5: Change dirt into a slightly unnatural liquid or gas (with
requisites).

Change dirt into an animal (with requisites).

Level 10: Change dirt into a highly unnatural liquid or gas (with
requisites).

Muto Terram Spells

Level 10

The Crystal Dart

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Requisite: Rego

The spell transforms a stone into a 10-inch crystal dart that rises from
the ground at your feet, floats into the air, and speeds off like an
arrow at a target that is within Voice range. It does +5 damage (because
of the sharp edges of the crystal as much as its speed), and always hits
its target, although it must penetrate Magic Resistance to have any real
effect.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Rego requisite)

Supple Iron and Rigid Rope

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Makes a flexible object stiff or a stiff object flexible. Casting
requisites of Forms appropriate to the materials affected are required.
Note that, despite the name, this spell is not high enough level to
affect iron.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

Level 15

Rock of Viscid Clay

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

Softens rock enough that it may be dug out, molded, and otherwise
manipulated in the same way that hard river clay can be. The rock is
slightly sticky. The spell affects rock in a roughly spherical shape
with a three-foot diameter.

(Base 2, +1 stone, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part)

Level 20

Edge of the Razor

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Sharpens any metal edge to a degree unequaled by manual methods. An
edged or pointed weapon gains a +2 bonus to Damage. Good-natured magi
reward grogs by enchanting their weapons in this way, although since the
resulting sword is resisted by Magic Resistance they rarely do this for
all their grogs.

(Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 metal)

Earth that Breaks No More

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Part

Turns a volume of packed dirt up to ten cubic paces into stone.

(Base 2, +1 stone, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Part, +1 size)

Object of Increased Size

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

This spell enlarges an inanimate object originally no bigger than a
large chest. The object doubles in each dimension and increases its
weight eight times. The size increase is based on the object\'s
original, natural size, so casting the spell more than once on an object
has no effect. Noble elements like gold, silver, and gems, are not
affected by this spell. If any part of the item resists growth, the item
as a whole does not grow. Casting requisites are required for the
appropriate Form for the target.

(Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 stone)

Level 35

Teeth of the Earth Mother

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Group

You cause twenty pointed pillars of white marble to spring up from the
ground to a height of 12 feet, forming a circle 3 paces in diameter. At
their tops, the pillars are thin and as sharp as spears. At the base,
where they touch, they are 18 inches thick. When the pillars spring up,
they can be used to cage people, to form a wall, or simply to skewer
enemies. Climbing to the top of the pillars requires three Athletics
stress rolls against an Ease Factor of 12, and the tops break away when
the target reaches them, causing the victim to fall. Skewering a target
does +25 damage, possibly more on following rounds if the victim
struggles or is exceptionally heavy. When the spell ends, the pillars
crumble to dust.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 Sun, +2 Group, +2 fancy effect)

Perdo Terram Guidelines

To destroy sand, mud, or clay, use the same level of magnitude as for
earth. To destroy stone or glass, add one magnitude. To destroy metal or
gemstone, add two magnitudes.

Perdo Terram botches, as well as destroying the wrong thing, can destroy
the ground that the caster is standing on, or metal objects that he is
holding.

General: Destroy sufficient matter to reduce an earth elemental's Might
Score by the level of the spell +2 magnitudes.

Level 2: Weaken dirt.

Level 3: Destroy dirt.

Level 5: Destroy one aspect of dirt, such as its weight or its
cohesiveness.

Perdo Terram Spells

Level 10

Fist of Shattering

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

An object of stone or weaker material up to a pace across breaks apart.
The appropriate Form for the target is a casting requisite.

(Base 3, +1 stone, +2 Voice)

Rusted Decay of Ten-Score Years

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

After the spell is cast, the metal of the target becomes so thoroughly
rusted that it breaks if used in any demanding way (for example, used to
strike a blow in combat or to pry open a door). It also loses any
sharpness it might once have had.

(Base 2, +2 metal, +2 Voice)

Level 15

Pit of the Gaping Earth

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Part

The dirt in a circle 6 paces across recedes into the ground, leaving a
pit 9 feet deep. If the target area contains material other than dirt,
that material is not affected.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Part, +1 size)

Level 20

Obliteration of the Metallic Barrier

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Req: Rego

Shatters a barrier of metal or stone up to one foot thick. Those within
one pace of the barrier, on the opposite side from you, take +10 Damage.
Alchemically refined and magical metals may be able to withstand this
spell.

(Base 3, +2 metal, +1 Touch, +1 size, +1 Rego to fling the fragments
away)

Stone to Falling Dust

R: Sight, D: Mom, T: Ind

One solid non-living object turns to a pile of dust. The object must be
a base Individual or smaller, so a stone item can be a pace across while
a metal item can only be one tenth that size in total. A casting
requisite may be required, of the Form appropriate to the target.

(Base 3, +2 metal/gems, +3 Sight)

Level 25

End of the Mighty Castle

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Str

A single stone structure, such as a castle keep or manor house, crumbles
to dust and small pebbles. Anyone inside at the time takes +10 damage
from falling and having stones land on them, possibly more if the
structure is particularly large.

(Base 3, +1 stone, +2 Voice, +3 Str)

Level 40

Cascade of Rocks

R: Sight, D: Mom, T: Part

Makes a cliff collapse, causing an avalanche. The effects depend on the
size of the cliff and what lies below it.

(Base 3, +1 stone, +3 Sight, +1 Part, +4 size)

Rego Terram Guidelines

The guidelines for controlling dirt, sand, mud, or clay are listed
below. Add one magnitude to control stone or glass, and two for metal or
gemstones, unless the item is simply being moved from one place to
another (as in *Unseen Arm* or either *Invisible Sling*). Manipulating
objects with great precision may also be higher, depending on the level
of precision.

Rego Terram botches often result in the caster being struck by large
amounts of flying stone.

General: Ward against beings associated with Terram from one
supernatural realm (Divine, Faerie, Infernal, or Magic) with Might less
than or equal to the level of the spell. (Touch, Ring, Circle)

Level 1: Control or move dirt in a natural fashion

Level 2: Control or move dirt in a slightly unnatural fashion.

Keep dirt away from you, under your conscious control (that is, you must
be aware of its presence).

Shape and form dirt, as if a craftsman had worked it.

Level 3: Control or move dirt in a very unnatural fashion.

Level 4: Transport a non-living object instantly up to 5 paces. Add one
magnitude for 50 paces, two magnitudes for 500 paces, three magnitudes
for one league, four magnitudes for seven leagues, and five magnitudes
for a place to which you have an Arcane Connection. Casting requisites
may be needed if the item is primarily not under the Form of Terram.

Level 5: Keep all dirt away from your body, or ward a target against
dirt.

Control a disembodied spirit associated with Terram.

Completely control an earth elemental.

Hurl a hard projectile with enough force to do +5 damage (range
increment of 20 paces). This applies magical force to the projectile at
the moment of casting, and the projectile then moves naturally.

Level 10: Hurl a hard projectile with enough force to do +10 damage
(range increment of 20 paces). This applies magical force to the
projectile at the moment of casting, and the projectile then moves
naturally.

Level 15: Summon a disembodied spirit associated with Terram.

Hurl a hard projectile with enough force to do +15 damage (range
increment of 20 paces). This applies magical force to the projectile at
the moment of casting, and the projectile then moves naturally.

Rego Terram Spells

General

Ward Against Faeries of the Mountain

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

As *Ward Against Faeries of the Waters* (ReAq Gen), but for faeries of
earth and stone. At some angles at night, the ring may be seen as a dark
brown dome.

Level 5

Unseen Arm

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Slowly moves a nonliving thing, like a mug, instrument, or small pouch
of coins; it cannot oppose intentional resistance. Magi use this spell
to manipulate things at a distance, but the spell cannot be used to pull
something from a person\'s hand or to move something that is held.
Casting requisites of an appropriate Form for the target are required.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +1 Conc)

Level 10

Trackless Step

R: Touch, D: Special, T: Part

You leave no tracks in the earth until you come to a stop, such as to
rest or fight. This spell draws on pre-Hermetic traditions, and does not
perfectly fit the categories of Hermetic magic.

(Base 2, +1 Touch, +2 Special (based on Concentration), +1 Part)

Invisible Sling of Vilano

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Hurl a stone (of a size that could be thrown with a mundane sling) at a
target within range. Unlike *Wielding the Invisible Sling*, this spell
hurls the stone as a projectile. An aiming roll is required to hit the
intended target, but if it succeeds, Magic Resistance offers no
protection. The stone inflicts +5 damage on impact and has a range
increment of 20 paces.

(Base 5, +1 Touch)

Wielding the Invisible Sling

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Hurls any nearby object that could normally be thrown by a person at any
target within range. The object must not be held down or otherwise
restrained. Damage depends on the object thrown, up to +5 for a
fist-sized stone. The object always hits, but it is resisted by Magic
Resistance. Casting requisites of an appropriate Form for the target are
required.

(Base 4, +2 Voice)

The Forgiving Earth

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Part

Loosens earth in a 15-pace-by-15-pace area to a depth of one foot,
making packed dirt as loose as plowed ground.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +1 Part, +1 size)

The Unseen Porter

R: Voice, D: Conc, T: Ind

Like *Unseen Arm* (ReTe 5), but it can carry large objects such as
crates. Roughly speaking, it has the capabilities of a very strong
person (Str +5). The heavier the object is, the slower the unseen porter
moves. If delicacy is required, high Finesse stress rolls (Ease Factor
12 or so) are needed. The spell can only carry inanimate objects, and
cannot carry you. It also cannot lift things more than 6 feet above the
ground. Casting requisites of an appropriate Form for the target are
required.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Conc)

Unyielding Earth

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Part

Compacts the surface of the ground in a 15-pace-by-15-pace area to a
depth of one foot, making it more solid. Mud becomes as soft earth, and
soft earth becomes as packed dirt.

(Base 2, +2 Voice, +1 Part, +1 size)

Level 15

The Earth\'s Carbuncle

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Part

Requisite: Muto

Causes a 1-pace circle of ground to become jagged stone, just under the
surface, and those fragments burst into the air. Anyone standing on the
circle is thrown into the air and hit with flying debris. Damage is +10.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Part, +1 Muto requisite)

Hands of the Grasping Earth

R: Voice, D: Diam, T: Part

Requisite: Muto

Earthen hands from beneath the target rise out of the ground, and grasp
the target\'s ankles. To break free requires a Strength stress roll of
15+. (One attempt is allowed per round, and each requires a Fatigue
roll.) Each hand can be destroyed by beating its +25 Soak roll (hacking
weapons do double normal damage) and inflicting a Light Wound.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Diam, +1 Part, requisite free)

Level 20

Crest of the Earth Wave

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Part

Creates a wave in the earth that starts at your feet and travels out to
the range of your Voice in a designated direction. It starts as a narrow
ripple and within 5 paces reaches its full size of 5 feet high and 30
paces wide. It moves about 50 paces per round. Those caught in its path
must make Dexterity stress rolls against an Ease Factor of 12 to leap
over the wave, or they are tossed aside and take +10 Damage. The wave
overturns trees and damages buildings in its path.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Part, +2 size)

Level 30

Creeping Chasm

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Part

Creates a chasm that runs from the ground in front of your feet towards
some target within range that you designate. The chasm travels about 4
paces per round, growing wider as it travels, reaching a maximum width
of 20 feet at a distance of 30 paces. The chasm is 20 to 30 feet deep,
and the sides are likely to collapse, so any caught in it are in a bit
of a bind. To avoid the growing chasm, a target must make a Quickness
stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9. The spell effect lasts a
moment, creating the stresses that then open the chasm over a few
rounds. The normal forces of the earth tend to close the chasm in a week
or so, but may not in some locations.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Part, +3 size, +1 fancy effect)

Earth Shock

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Part

Shakes the ground in a 100 pace radius. All affected by this spell must
make a Quickness - Encumbrance stress roll against an Ease Factor of 10
or fall. Apply these modifiers: standing still, +2; on solid stone, +2;
moving slowly, +0; on earth, +0; running, --2; standing on a narrow
bridge, --6.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Part, +4 size)

The Earth Split Asunder

R: Voice, D: Spec, T: Part

Creates a 5-foot-wide, 60-foot-long, 10-foot-deep crack in the ground.
It opens on one round, stays open for another round, and closes at the
start of a third round, crushing all within it for +25 damage. You must
maintain concentration for all three rounds, or the pit slowly closes,
over an hour\'s time, rather than shutting quickly and violently. To
avoid the pit, those in its vicinity other than the caster must make a
Quickness stress roll against an Ease Factor of 9. Falling in incurs +5
damage. To escape, another such roll is made. Unless outside help is
provided, people in the pit only get one chance to escape.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Special based on Mom, +1 Part, +2 size, +1 fancy
effect)

Level 75

Hermes\' Portal

R: Arc, D: Year, T: Ind, Ritual

Creates a magical portal through which people, animals, and objects can
travel almost instantaneously. The ritual must be cast twice,
simultaneously at two different locations, and after the rituals are
performed, there is a magical connection between them. The magi
conducting each ritual must have an Arcane Connection (such as a clod of
dirt) to the other location when they are conducting the ritual. The
portal is activated by some command word or ritual determined when the
portal is enchanted. Inanimate things and unwilling creatures may be
transmitted if someone else says the command word, and pushes the
subject through.

(Mercurian Ritual)

Vim Spells

Vim spells are very useful. They help you use your spells to better
effect, and since using spells efficiently is what being a master magus
is all about, these spells are very important. With imagination, you can
use these spells to make wards, alarms, one-use magic items, and other
interesting things. Many Vim spells are meant to be cast along with
other spells, and modify or change their effects.

Vim magic also encompasses dealing with demons. Summoning and dealing
with demons is prohibited within the Order, but fighting them is
allowed.

Magi often use Vim to counteract magical phenomena. Storyguides should
assign spell levels for all magical phenomena that those using Vim
counterspells will have to match.

Most Vim spells are of General level, because the magic that Vim spells
affect varies widely in power. A spell to dispel a first magnitude spell
needs to be much less powerful than a similar spell to dispel a fifth
magnitude effect. The guidelines provided for Vim spells take account of
this, and rather than giving an absolute level for a corresponding
effect, they give the relationship that the level of the Vim spell must
bear to the level of the target.

As usual, these guidelines refer to a spell with the basic Range,
Duration and Target. When changing these parameters the change in level
should be taken account of before multiplying or dividing the spell
level to get the effect. Thus, a version of *Wind of Mundane Silence*
(PeVi) with Sight range would dispel a spell with a level of up to half
(spell level -- 5 + stress die). Ten levels of the spell\'s power are
devoted to increasing the Target to Room, and 15 to increasing the Range
to Sight, and only the remaining power is available for the spell.

The Individual target for a Vim spell can refer to either an individual
spell, or an individual object or person, and similarly for Group. If
the target is an object or person, the Vim spell will affect any
suitable magic affecting that person, not just one spell. Most such
spells can only be cast on either other spells or individuals, but, if
the description suggests that they could be cast on either, then they
can. For example, *Mirror of Opposition* can only be cast on other
spells, while *The Phantom Gift* can only be cast on people.

Spells and magical effects do not have sizes, so size modifications do
not apply to the levels of Individual Target Vim spells. However, Vim
spells affecting areas, or number of spells, must be increased in level
for large areas or large numbers, as normal.

The guidelines below refer mainly to spells. This is for the sake of
brevity, as Vim spells can affect magical effects proceeding from
magical items, magical creatures, or demons. However, unless
specifically stated otherwise, the spells do not affect magical items,
only the effects that they produce. Thus, *Wind of Mundane Silence*
could dispel a stone wall produced by a magical item, but *Disenchant*
is needed to dispel the magic of the item itself.

It should be noted that Hermetic magi, and most non-Hermetic wizards, do
not have Might scores, and thus are not affected by wards or other
spells that act against Might scores.

Creo Vim Guidelines

There are few Creo Vim spells known throughout the Order.

Creo Vim botches often give the caster additional Warping Points, as the
raw magic runs out of control.

General: Create a magical shell which looks real to Intellego spells
with a level less than or equal to twice its level, plus one magnitude
(this aura is generic \'magic\' only --- no misleading information can
be supplied).

Create a magical shell which prevents Intellego spells with a level less
than or equal to its level, plus one magnitude from learning any details
about the magic on the target.

Create a magical shell which gives false information about the target to
Intellego spells with level less than or equal to half its (level plus
one magnitude).

Refreshes all spell traces within the target that are less then the
magnitude of the guideline --1, in negative magnitude. This restores
them to their initial strength, generally half the magnitude of the
spell (see the Intellego Vim guidelines)

Level 3: Taint something with magic.

Level 4: Create a temporary Arcane Connection to a target within range.
This Arcane Connection cannot be fixed in a laboratory, and does not
itself give a bonus to Penetration. It does, however, allow the magus to
use other methods to boost Penetration, and to use other spells on the
target even if the magus can no longer perceive it. Note that this spell
must Penetrate the target's Magic Resistance, if any, like any other
spell.

Level 5: Create a burst of magic that gives the target one Warping
Point. Spells that grant Warping cannot have a duration of greater than
Momentary. Note that doing this to a magus is an attack, and clearly
against the Code.

Decrease the rate of decay of an Arcane Connection as if the connection
were one step higher on the table on page @@. If this increases the
Duration to Years or greater, the duration of the connection continues
to be measured in a period of years. Hermetic magic can not make an
Arcane Connection last indefinitely without fixing the connection as
described in the Laboratory chapter (page @@). Note that the range is
the range to the Arcane Connection, and you must know what you are
targeting just like any other spell.

Level 10: Give the target two Warping Points.

Decrease the rate of decay of an Arcane Connection as if the connection
were two steps higher on the table on page @@, subject to the same
limits as above.

Level 15: Give the target three Warping Points.

Decrease the rate of decay of an Arcane Connection as if the connection
were three steps higher on the table on page @@, subject to the same
limits as above.

Creo Vim Spells

General

Restore the Faded Threads

R: Touch, D: Diam, T: Circle

Once a spell trace has been found or suspected, this spell is used to
make it examinable. This spell temporarily restores spell traces to a
fresh state (as if they had just expired). The spell will restore spell
traces of negative magnitude up to the magnitude of this spell --3. The
trace must still be existent to be affected (magnitude --9 or greater).
Thus the maximum effective level of this spell is 50.

Versions of this spell also exist for all standard Targets. Diameter
duration is normally long enough to conduct Intellego Vim investigations
of the spell traces.

(Base, +1 Touch, +1 Dia)

Shell of False Determinations

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual

Creates a \"shell\" of magic on an item, helping to shield it from
investigation by other magi. All attempts to investigate the magic item
give false information about its powers unless half of the level of the
shell is exceeded by the magus\'s Investigation roll.

(Base effect, +1 Touch)

Shell of Opaque Mysteries

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual

This spell is similar to *Shell of False Determinations* (above), but it
causes all attempts to investigate the magic item to utterly fail,
unless the level of the ritual is exceeded by the magus\'s Investigation
roll. Once a magus determines the presence of a particular shell (that
is, by overcoming it), it has no more power against him or her.

(Base effect, +1 Touch)

Level 15

The Phantom Gift

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Ind

The target of the spell becomes tainted with magic as most magi are.
Beasts and people react to the target as though he were a magus. Those
who normally associate with the victim do not become hostile, but do
give him or her a wider berth. The spell has no effect on those who
already have The Gift, including those blessed with the Gentle Gift.

(Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 Sun)

Level 30

The Enigma\'s Gift

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

The target of the spell gains four Warping Points (plus the normal one
for being affected by a powerful supernatural effect, in most cases)
and, if a Hermetic magus, must check to see whether he enters Twilight
in the normal way. Although the burst of magic that causes the Warping
lasts but a moment, the resulting Warping is permanent.

(Base 20, +2 Voice)

Intellego Vim Guidelines

Since magic is a tricky thing to understand, spells that detect magic
are at once difficult and important. Although demons deal in Vim, they
are made of the essence of deception itself. If a demon does not wish to
be detected, it cannot be (at least to the common knowledge of the
Order), and for this reason there are no demon-locating magics. Magic
items cannot be investigated with simple magic spells. Investigation
requires that you spend at least one season in the laboratory to
discover what magic an enchanted item contains (see the Laboratory
chapter). A spell will suffice to tell you that an item is magical,
however, and may give you some idea of its powers. Spells will never
tell you how to use an item.

General: Detect the traces of magic of negative magnitude up to the
magnitude of the guideline used -- 2.

Level 1: Detect magic of tenth magnitude or higher.

Detect the presence of a supernatural aura.

Detect the presence of vis. As concentrated magic, vis is not hard to
spot.

Level 2: Detect magic of eighth magnitude or higher.

Determine the power of a supernatural aura.

Level 3: Detect magic of sixth magnitude or higher.

Detect regio boundaries. If cast with a Vision target, this provides
enough information to find a way between levels, for regiones that allow
that sort of entrance. Otherwise, it reveals the presence of a regio,
and possibly its rough shape.

Level 4: Detect magic of third magnitude or higher.

Judge the amount of vis present.

Discern the Art of vis.

Level 5: Detect any active magic.

Speak with a supernatural creature. (A different spell is required for
each of the four realms.)

The base level of a spell to detect magic also gives a fairly good idea
of the strength of the magic (within a magnitude). The addition of one
magnitude will say whether the effect is Hermetic, and a magus familiar
with other types of magic will be able to identify them as well. The
addition of two magnitudes will give information about Technique and
Form, or nearest equivalent for other types of magic. The addition of
three magnitudes gives the rough details of the effect and the sigil of
the caster, and reveals whether a Hermetic effect was created by a spell
or invested device. A magus with extensive experience of a particular
kind of non-Hermetic magic can do the same for that; the spell reveals
the information, but the caster may not be able to interpret it. Further
increases in level yield further information, depending on the design of
the specific spell.

Different spells may be invented to detect Faerie, Divine, or Infernal
effects. Each spell only affects one realm, and storyguides may wish to
disallow spells to detect the Divine or Infernal.

As a general rule, residues of magic decline as follows. As soon as the
magic finishes, the magnitude halves. It then drops by one for every
duration of the spell that passes. Once this reaches zero, the residues
decline more slowly. Residues of non-Ritual Momentary, Concentration,
and Diameter Duration drop by one every month, while residues of other
effects drop by one every year. A 'negative magnitude' of 10 indicates
that the residue has disappeared completely, and no longer exists to be
detected.

Magical items have an effective residue magnitude equal to the number of
pawns of vis used to open the enchantment (or the total pawns used for
lesser enchanted devices). Magnitudes of non-Hermetic items must be set
by the storyguide. A spell to detect items will not also detect effects
or creatures, and vice-versa. Variants will detect items enchanted by
different Realms, as above.

Magical creatures can also be detected. Treat their Might as the level
of the effect; for Hermetic magi, use their highest Art. Divide Might or
highest Art by five (rounding up) to get the effective residue
magnitude. Again, this requires a dedicated spell, and variants may
detect Faerie and possibly Divine creatures. Demons may not be detected.
Troupes may, at their option, allow spells that detect other Infernal
creatures, such as diabolists and undead.

Raw vis will show up as magical, simply as raw vis, under any magical
detection. The level of the detecting spell is irrelevant, as is the
realm of power that it was designed to detect. However, only specially
designed spells will yield any information other than that it is raw
vis.

Intellego Vim botches generally give false information.

Intellego Vim Spells

General

The Invisible Eye Revealed

R: Per, D: Conc, T: Touch

The caster can feel any magical means currently being used to spy on
him. The representation varies in a way that depends on the spell, but
it often feels like something touching the magus\'s back. For example, a
magus being spied upon with *Enchantment of the Scrying Pool* might feel
wet fingers, while a magus who is being tracked by *The Inexorable
Search* might feel a finger running over his skin. This spell detects
the use of Intellego spells of up to double the level of this spell. A
special spell is required because most Intellego spells are designed to
be subtle, and they are more subtle at higher levels.

(Base effect)

Level 2

Sense of Magical Power

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

This spell tells the caster whether he is currently in a Magic aura. It
does not give any further information. Other spells do the same for
other kinds of aura.

(Base 1, +1 Touch)

Level 5

Scales of the Magical Weight

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

When casting this spell, you typically hold your hands straight out from
your body, place a known amount of Vim vis in your left hand (usually
one pawn), and then place an unknown amount of vis in your right hand.
After casting the spell, you may sense how heavy the unknown vis is in
relation to the known, determining the number of pawns present. If you
cast the spell without anything to measure the unknown vis against, you
only have a very general idea of how valuable it is. The spell cannot be
used to determine the amount of raw vis invested in an enchanted item.

(Base 4, +1 Touch)

Sense the Nature of Vis

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

You can tell what Art a supply of raw vis is connected to. To you, the
vis appears to glow with an aura that is appropriate to the Technique or
Form that the vis is associated with. Creo is white, Intellego gold,
Muto constantly fluctuating, Perdo black, Rego purple, Animal brown,
Aquam blue, Auram violet, Corpus dark red, Herbam green, Imaginem pearly
blue, Ignem bright red, Mentem orange, Terram dark brown, and Vim
silver. Some of the colors are very similar, but are easy to distinguish
if the item is held steadily and studied for a few seconds.

(Base 4, +1 Touch)

Level 20

Piercing the Faerie Veil

R: Per, D: Conc, T: Vision.

This spell allows the caster to see through the boundaries of Faerie
regiones, and therefore divine the path to the next level (more details
about regiones are given on page @@). There are separate but related
spells for Divine, Magical and Infernal regiones.

(Base 3, +1 Conc, +4 Vision)

Level 30

Sense of the Lingering Magic

R: Per, D: Conc, T: Hearing

This spell can detect the presence of many magical residues, even from
weak spells, as well as giving the presence and power of active spells.
It does not grant any information apart from the power, however. The
residue must be of at least zero magnitude.

(Base 10, +1 Conc, +3 Hearing)

Level 40

Sight of the Active Magics

R: Per, D: Conc, T: Vision

You can see spells as \"auras\" around things and people. The color of
the aura indicates the Form of the spell working on a subject, the color
matching the appropriate one described in *Sense the Nature of Vis*
(page @@). The Technique of a spell working on the subject is recognized
by the aura\'s shape, not color. Creo and Rego are both very orderly
auras. Muto is constantly shifting, and Intellego usually is as well,
but more slowly. A Perdo aura is usually in fragments. Thus, a magus
with both *Endurance of the Berserkers* and *The Invisible Eye Revealed*
upon him has a very controlled, orderly aura of deep red around his or
her entire body, and the magus\'s eyes are surrounded with slowly
shifting auras of a silvery hue. You should be warned: Imaginem or Vim
spells may be used to disguise auras. Also note that this spell will
detect the residues of some spells.

(Base 5, +1 Conc, +4 Vision, +2 Techniques and Forms)

Muto Vim Guidelines

These spells let you change other spells.

These meta-magical spells have certain special restrictions, which apply
to all Muto Vim spells invented according to Hermetic theory. First of
all, they cannot be cast on Spontaneous spells. Such magic is being
manipulated at whim-any attempt to alter it further would make the
caster lose control. (This is necessary for game balance.)

Second, you must make an Intelligence + Concentration roll against an
Ease Factor of 9 if you are casting both spells (that is, the MuVi spell
and the spell it is affecting). If this fails, the spells do not go off.
If it botches, they botch. (This is slightly easier than normal.)

If you wish to cast one of these spells on a spell being cast by another
magus, you must either be co-operating, or you must fast cast the MuVi
spell. There is no other way to get the timing right. In addition, your
Penetration total for the Muto Vim spell must beat the other magus\'s
Penetration total for the spell to be changed, unless you are
co-operating.

Touch range is sufficient to affect your own spells, but Voice range, at
least, is needed to affect another magus\'s casting. You cannot touch
the spell itself.

These spells can only be used on Hermetic magic, as they depend on a
good understanding of the processes involved.

You may only put a Muto Vim effect into a magical item if it is to work
with another effect in that item. All Muto Vim spells require some
tailoring to the specific use, and a magical item effect cannot be so
tailored.

Note that a spell invented according to one of the guidelines below will
change another spell in a specific way: it is not possible to invent a
single spell which changes another spell however the caster wants. See
the example spells for ideas on how specific this should be.

It is not possible, for reasons that Hermetic theorists do not well
understand, to use Muto Vim to affect another spell after it has been
cast.

If the parameters of an effect after it has been changed by a Muto Vim
spell would normally require a Ritual, then at least one of the original
spell and the Muto Vim spell must be a Ritual. For example, a Formulaic
or Spontaneous Muto Vim effect on a Formulaic spell cannot produce an
effect that would normally require a Ritual.

Muto Vim botches can have any conceivable effect, as they alter the
other spell in unpredictable ways.

Muto Vim spells work by altering the magical energies that create the
spell as it is being cast. The spell is the result of the combination of
the base casting and the Muto Vim effect, and has its effect once both
the casting and the Muto Vim effect have finished. This means that a
Muto Vim spell must have a duration at least as long as the casting of
the target spell, but need not last for as long as the spell itself. For
normally-cast formulaic spells, a Momentary Duration is sufficient, but
if the casting time is longer for any reason, the Muto Vim spell must
also have a longer Duration; Sun is sufficient for any practical Ritual.

An increase in power or parameters may not raise the level of the target
spell above the guideline level used for the Muto Vim spell.

General: Superficially change a spell of less than or equal to twice the
(level + 1 magnitude) of the Vim spell. This may not change the primary
effect of the spell, or its power.

Significantly change a spell of less than or equal to the level + 1
magnitude of the Vim spell. This may not change either the Technique or
Form of the target spell. A change in power of plus or minus one
magnitude is a significant change, as is a change of target, if the
target was possible for the original spell.

Totally change a spell of less than or equal to half the (level + 1
magnitude) of the Vim spell. This may change the Technique, Form, or
both of the target spell, and needs no requisites for those Arts. The
Vim spell affects the structure of the spell, not the things that the
spell targets. A change in power of up to two magnitudes is a total
change. Any greater change requires either Creo or Perdo to create more
magical energy or destroy some.

Muto Vim Spells and Enchanted Devices

Muto Vim spells affect other spells, and can also affect spell-like
effects instilled in enchanted devices, as long as certain conditions
are met.

A Muto Vim effect can be put into a magical item, as long as it affects
another power instilled in the item. If spell-like powers in a magical
item can be manipulated by Muto Vim effects, then spell-like powers can
also be manipulated by Muto Vim spells. The reverse is not true; a
general purpose Muto Vim spell-like effect cannot be instilled in a
magical item with the intent to affect spells that the wielder desires
to target. Muto Vim spell-like effects can only affect other spell-like
effects in the same magical item.

If the magus casting the Muto Vim spell is the same person activating a
magical item, then the standard rules for casting a Muto Vim spell
apply. The caster must succeed with an Intelligence + Concentration roll
against an Ease Factor of 9.

If the magus is not the same person activating the magical item, the
rules governing a Muto Vim spell cast on another magus\' spell apply. If
an ally activates the magical item, and the magus and item-activator
have worked out the timing issues before hand, the two are considered to
be cooperating. The caster must succeed with an Intelligence +
Concentration roll against an Ease Factor of 9.

If the caster and the item-activator have not worked out the timing
issues beforehand, then they are not cooperating. An enemy using a
magical item falls into this category. In this case, the magus must fast
cast the Muto Vim spell. He must also beat the magical item\'s
Penetration with his Muto Vim spell\'s Penetration. Because most Muto
Vim spells are Form specific, he must also correctly identify the Form
of the device\'s spell-like effect. Use the Determine Form of Magical
Effect formula (page @@) to determine whether the magus is successful.
If the magus correctly identifies the Form, succeeds with a fast cast
defense roll against the item-activator\'s Initiative roll, and casts
his spell with higher Penetration than the device\'s Penetration, his
Muto Vim spell affects the device\'s spell-like effect.

All other Muto Vim spell rules apply. The magical item must be Hermetic.
The Muto Vim spell can have Range Touch if the magus is holding the
magical item, but must have Range Voice, at least, if someone else is
holding the magical item or he triggers it from a distance.

Muto Vim Spells

General

Mirror of Opposition (Form)

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Cast on another spell while the other spell is being cast, this causes
the targeted spell to have the exact opposite of its normal effects.
This effect works on spells up to half the (level -- 5) of the *Mirror
of Opposition* spell. The effects of the inversion are up to the
storyguide to determine, but the target of the inverted spell usually
remains the same as that of the original spell. The inverted spell
cannot overcome any limitations of Hermetic magic. For example, if a
Momentary Perdo Corpus spell is cast, the inversion is probably a Creo
Corpus spell of Sun duration. There are ten versions of this spell, each
affecting spells of one of the Hermetic forms.

(Base effect, +2 Voice)

Shroud Magic

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

This spell allows a magus to suppress or alter the sigil in a spell that
is currently being cast. The spell to be shrouded can be up to double
the Shroud\'s level, and Shroud Magic has the same sigil (or lack of) as
that given to the shrouded spell.

(Base effect, +1 Touch)

The Sorcerer\'s Fork

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

This spell splits another spell (whose level must be less than or equal
to the level of this spell) into two or more identical spells of reduced
power, which may be cast against two or more separate targets. Each
resulting spell has the same Range and Target (target category, that is
--- the actual target may be different) as the original spell, but the
power of the effect is divided by the number of resulting split spells.
The precise effect is at storyguide discretion. One casting die is
rolled, and the Penetration total is split between the spells. *The
Sorcerer\'s Fork* must be equal to or greater than the level of the
spell that is to be split. The split spell has a targeting penalty as
for multiple casting (see page @@). If the casting magus is not
co-operating, all the split spells will strike the original target.

(Base effect, +1 Touch)

Wizard\'s Boost (Form)

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

You cast this spell as another spell of a level less than or equal to
this one is cast. The effect of the other spell increases 5 levels in
power, but not past the level of the *Wizard\'s Boost*. The effects of
the extra 5 levels of power are for the storyguide to determine. A
*Wizard\'s Boost* may never affect a single spell more than once. There
are ten versions of this spell, one for each Hermetic Form.

(Base effect, +1 Touch)

Wizard\'s Communion

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Group

This spell lets magi combine their power to cast spells. The group of
magi work together to cast a specified spell through the unified power
of the Communion. Only one extra magus may join the Communion for each 5
levels of the specified spell being cast. One of the magi in the group
must also know the specified spell, or cast it from a Casting Tablet
(page @@).

Only one magus in the group needs to cast the spell. The magus who casts
the Wizard\'s Communion need not be the one who casts the main spell,
and normally it is better for them to be different. More than one magus
in the group may cast this spell. In this case, add the total levels of
successfully cast Wizard\'s Communion to get the effective level of the
Wizard\'s Communion for this casting. This combined total must be at
least twice the level of the specified spell being cast.

One magus must roll for success as if casting the specified spell
himself. However, the target number for the spellcasting roll is the
spell\'s level divided by the number of magi participating in the
Communion. So if five magi participate to cast a 50th level spell, the
caster would have to successfully cast a 10th level spell --- with all
the relevant requisites, of course. This method of casting adds one
botch die per magus participating. If the spell botches, all
participants gain Warping Points and must check for Twilight if they
gain two or more.

Communion is a remnant of Mercurian rituals, so it does not perfectly
fit into the guidelines of Hermetic theory.

(Base effect)

Wizard\'s Reach (Form)

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

The range of the targeted spell increases by one category. You may not
affect a single spell more than once with this spell, and the targeted
spell must be at least one magnitude lower in level than this spell.
There are ten versions of *Wizard\'s Reach*, one for each Form.

(Base effect, +2 Voice)

Wizard\'s Vigil

R: Voice, D: Sun, T: Group

This spell functions as *Wizard\'s Communion*, except that the longer
duration allows it to be used with Ritual spells. For the purposes of
its effect, treat it as a *Wizard\'s Communion* of two magnitudes lower.

Perdo Vim Guidelines

Most Perdo Vim spells are specific to one of the four Supernatural
Realms. If you want to cast a Perdo Vim spell on a character who has
Magic Resistance, you must overcome the Magic Resistance.

General: Make something (including a magical item) seem non-magical to
any Intellego spell of less than or equal to twice the (level + 2
magnitudes) of this spell.

Dispel effects of a specific type with a level less than or equal to the
level + 4 magnitudes of the Vim spell + a stress die (no botch). A
specific type could be Hermetic Terram magic, or Shamanic spirit control
magic. A magus must have some knowledge of a type of magic (although not
necessarily ability to use it) to invent a spell to affect it. All
Hermetic magi have some knowledge of all Hermetic magic.

Reduce a target\'s Might Score by the level of the spell + 2 magnitudes,
as long as the spell penetrates the creature\'s Magic Resistance.

Reduce a target\'s Might Pool by the level of the spell + 2 magnitudes,
as long as the spell penetrates the creature\'s Magic Resistance.

Dispel any supernatural effect of one realm with a level less than or
equal to half the (level + 4 magnitudes + a stress die (no botch)) of
the Vim spell.

Reduce the casting total for all supernatural powers of one realm cast
by the target by half the (level + 2 magnitudes) of the spell. If two or
more such spells affect one target, only the highest has any effect: the
penalties do not add. The spell must penetrate the target\'s Magic
Resistance in order to have any effect.

Reduce the casting total for a specific type of supernatural effect
(such as Hermetic magic) cast by the target by the (level + 2
magnitudes) of the spell. If two or more such spells affect one target,
only the highest has any effect: the penalties do not add. The spell
must penetrate the target\'s Magic Resistance in order to have any
effect. A maga must be familiar with a type of supernatural effect to
invent a spell to affect it.

Age a spell trace to a negative magnitude equal to the guideline used
(for example, --2 for a level 10 guideline).

Dispel a Hermetic enchantment with a level less than the guideline level
used + 1 magnitude + a stress die (no botch). The spell must be a
Ritual.

Dispel a specific type of enchantment with a level less than twice the
guideline level used + 2 magnitudes + a stress die (no botch). The spell
must specify a particular Hermetic Form or a specific type of
enchantment, such as Talismans, Familiars or Longevity Rituals. More
general enchantments do not qualify. Spell must be a Ritual.

Dispel Hermetic Form Resistance aligned to a given Form with a level
less than or equal to the level of the Vim spell + 2 magnitudes + a
stress die (no botch). Spell must penetrate the Vim-based Magic
Resistance of the target.

Dispel Magic Resistance from a Might score aligned to one Realm with a
level less than or equal to the level of the Vim spell + 4 magnitudes +
a stress die (no botch). Spell must penetrate the Vim-based Magic
Resistance of the target.

Destroy an amount of raw vis equal to the level of the spell.

Level 5: Reduce the duration of an Arcane Connection by one step on the
table on page @@. If this reduces the duration below Hours, the
connection expires immediately. Does not work on connections that
naturally have Indefinite duration, but can make an Arcane Connection
that was fixed in the laboratory expire. Note that the Range is the
range to the Arcane Connection, and you must know what you are
targeting, just as for any other spell.

Level 10: Reduce the duration of an Arcane Connection by two steps on
the table on page @@, subject to the same limits as above.

Level 15: Reduce the duration of an Arcane Connection by three steps on
the table on page @@, subject to the same limits as above.

Level 20: Reduce the duration of an Arcane Connection by four steps on
the table on page @@, subject to the same limits as above.

Level 25: Reduce the duration of an Arcane Connection by five steps on
the table on page @@, subject to the same limits as above.

Level 30: Reduce the duration of an Arcane Connection by six steps on
the table on page @@, subject to the same limits as above. This level of
effect is sufficient to make almost any Arcane Connection expire
instantly.

Perdo Vim Spells

General

Demon\'s Eternal Oblivion

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Weakens and possibly destroys a creature with Infernal Might. If the
spell penetrates the creature's Magic Resistance, the creature loses
Might Score equal to the spell\'s level.

(Base effect, +2 Voice)

Disenchant

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind, Ritual

You make a Hermetic magic item lose all its powers permanently if the
level of this spell + a stress die (no botch) equals or exceeds the
highest level of the enchantments in the item. The enchantment is
utterly destroyed, as is all of the vis that was used in the magic item.
The object left is in all ways a mundane item, but could be invested
with enchantments again at a later time.

(Base effect, +1 Touch)

Masking the Odor of Magic

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Prevents the detection of a magic spell, or of a magic power in an item
or being, by InVi magic, unless the level of the InVi spell exceeds
twice the level of this spell -- 5 (for example, exceeds 20 for a level
15 version).

(Base effect, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

Unravelling the Fabric of (Form)

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

This spell will cancel the effects of any one spell of a specified Form
whose level is less than or equal to (spell level + 10 + stress die (no
botch)). There are 10 variants that cover each Hermetic Form, and a
number of much rarer variants for different kinds of non-Hermetic magic.

(Base effect, +2 Voice)

Wind of Mundane Silence

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Room

You raise a metaphorical \"breeze\" that blows the magic away from an
area, canceling the effects of any spell there. You can cancel the
effects of any spell if, with this spell, you can double the level of
the spell on a stress die + the level of your spell. The spell must
Penetrate to affect effects on a creature with Magic Resistance,
including Parma Magica. If the spell penetrates, and its level + the
stress die is double Parma Magica x 5, then this spell dispels the Parma
Magica. *Wind of Mundane Silence* does not affect spells of Momentary
duration. Magical things near the area of the Wind wave slightly from
the \"breeze.\"

(Base effect, +2 Voice, +2 Room)

Rego Vim Guidelines

Rego Vim spells repel demons and other supernatural creatures.
Theoretically, it is possible to conjure and control demons through Rego
Vim spells, but this knowledge and its use are forbidden by the Hermetic
Code. Any who find and dare to use this knowledge face dangers from both
the beings they deal with and those in the Order of Hermes who strongly
object to such practices.

Rego Vim would also be the combination of Arts that granted Magic
Resistance, but not even Bonisagus was able to turn Parma Magica into a
spell. *Aegis of the Hearth* is the best that has been managed, and that
spell is not fully integrated into Hermetic theory.

General: Ward against all supernatural beings from one realm (Divine,
Faerie, Infernal, or Magic) with Might less than or equal to the level
of the spell. (Touch, Ring, Circle)

Sustain or suppress a spell you have cast whose level is less than or
equal to the level + 2 magnitudes of the Vim spell. This, and the
similar guidelines below, cannot make a spell last longer than it could
have naturally, and so the sustaining version is only useful with
Concentration Duration, among the standard Hermetic Durations.
Similarly, a spell that has been suppressed still ends when its original
duration expires.

Create a conduit or container for spells with level less than or equal
to the level + 5 magnitudes of the Vim spell. A conduit puts you in
mystical contact with the target (effective Touch range), while a
container will hold a spell for a specific length of time before
releasing it.

Sustain or suppress a spell cast by another with level less than or
equal to half the (level + 5 magnitudes) of the Vim spell. This
guideline may be used to target the spell itself or the caster of the
spells.

Sustain or suppress a spell or spells of a specific type cast by another
with level less than the level + 2 magnitudes of the Vim spell. Examples
of specific types include Hermetic Terram magic and Shamanic spirit
control magic. This guideline may be used to target the spell itself or
the caster of the spells.

Level 5: Control any disembodied spirit associated with one of the four
supernatural realms. (A different spell is needed for each realm.)

Level 10: Move raw vis from one physical object to another, without
needing a laboratory.

Level 15: Summon any disembodied spirit associated with one of the four
supernatural realms. (A different spell is needed for each realm.)

Rego Vim Spells

General

Aegis of the Hearth

R: Touch, D: Year, T: Bound, Ritual

This ritual protects a covenant in a way similar to the way in which a
Parma Magica protects a magus. It provides very strong protection
against supernatural effects and creatures that originate from outside
the boundary of the Aegis, and much weaker and less consistent
protection against supernatural effects originating within the Aegis.
The ritual also allows certain individuals to be excluded from the
effects of the Aegis, so that it does not hinder their supernatural
powers at all. These individuals are referred to as \"natives\" of the
Aegis in this description, and other individuals, and the effects they
create, are referred to as \"foreign\". \"Native\" and \"foreign\" are
determined for a particular casting of an Aegis. Each casting of *Aegis
of the Hearth* determines who and what is native and foreign without
reference to any other Aegis, even if it is a new Aegis being cast, by
the same group of magi on the same boundary, to replace their
covenant\'s old Aegis.

No foreign supernatural creature with Might, of any type, can cross the
boundary of the Aegis unless its Might exceeds the level of the Aegis.
The Aegis of the Hearth must Penetrate the creature\'s Magic Resistance
in order to have this effect. A foreign supernatural creature that is
within the Aegis when it is created is not expelled, although it does
suffer the limits to its powers described later. If the creature were to
leave the Aegis, it would need to have a higher Might than the Aegis, or
resist the Aegis, in order to enter again. A spirit with Might that is
capable of possessing another creature may enter the Aegis inside that
creature, as long as it remains entirely passive. It is aware of what is
going on, but cannot act in any way, including to end the possession. If
the vessel becomes a native of the Aegis, the possessing spirit also
does. The spirit can, however, have its invitation revoked (see later)
separately from that of its vessel, if the person revoking the
invitation knows that the spirit is there.

Any foreign supernatural effect that originates from outside the Aegis
and would affect anything inside the Aegis must Penetrate a Magic
Resistance equal to the level of the Aegis of the Hearth to take effect.
If it fails to Penetrate, the effect fails completely and harmlessly.
This applies to all effects, including Intellego effects that would not
normally be blocked by Magic Resistance, and effects that would move
something across the boundary of the Aegis.

This also applies to an existing foreign supernatural effect that tries
to cross the boundary. If the effect cannot Penetrate the Aegis, it is
dispelled. However, if the spell is cast on someone with Magic
Resistance, for example an invisibility spell on a magus, then the Aegis
must Penetrate the magus\'s Magic Resistance in order to dispel the
effect. This includes such effects as the Parma Magica, Hermetic
Longevity Rituals, Familiar Bonds, and Talisman Bonds. However, the last
three of these are automatically sustained by the underlying magic, and
so immediately come back into effect once the magus has entered the
Aegis. Parma Magica must be raised again, in the normal way.

Any foreign supernatural effect originating within the boundary of the
Aegis must subtract half the level of the Aegis from any Casting Total
or equivalent. If the effect does not have a Casting Total, as for an
effect from an enchanted item, then half the level of the Aegis is
subtracted from its Penetration. If the effect has neither a Casting
Total nor a Penetration, like the Parma Magica, it is not hindered by
the Aegis once it is inside. The supernatural powers of creatures with
Might that have been able to enter the Aegis are affected in the same
way as any other foreign supernatural effect; this effect does not need
to Penetrate Magic Resistance, unlike the exclusion effect.

Anyone who participated in the ritual to cast the Aegis is a native of
that Aegis. Entirely mundane people can participate in the Aegis ritual.
At most covenants, only the magi participate in the ritual, to avoid the
risk of making disguised demons into natives of the Aegis, but this is a
custom rather than a feature of the ritual.

Participants who have The Gift and have been opened to the Hermetic Arts
are referred to here as \"participating magi\", although they may, for
example, be apprentices. Participating magi, and only participating
magi, can invite other individuals into the Aegis. This involves giving
the individual a token that was designated as part of the ritual.
Individuals that are invited in this way become natives of the Aegis.
Any participating magus can also revoke an invitation, whether issued by
themselves or by someone else. They do not need to retrieve the token in
order to do this. Invitations and revocations can only be issued to
specific individuals --- it is not possible to revoke \"all
invitations\", for example --- but the individual does not need to be
present. Invitations and revocations are effective even if the
participating magus is mistaken about the identity of the individual. A
participating magus can attempt to revoke an invitation even if they do
not know for sure that a particular individual has been invited into the
Aegis. If they were, then the invitation is revoked, but if they were
not, this obviously has no effect. A creature with Might whose
invitation is withdrawn is affected in the same way as a creature with
Might who was within the Aegis when it was created. Individuals who
participated in the ritual, including participants who are not
participating magi, cannot be cast out of the ritual; they are native
until the Aegis expires, or is dispelled.

Enchanted items can also be native to the Aegis. There are three main
classes. The first is items that were within the boundary at the time
the Aegis was raised. Unlike creatures with Might, non-sentient items
become native to the Aegis simply by being present. The second class is
items created within the Aegis by someone native to the Aegis. The third
is items deliberately and directly activated by a native of the Aegis.
Covenfolk who will use enchanted items may, therefore, participate in
the Aegis ritual, but many enchanted items do not need Penetration, and
thus can be used within the Aegis without any problems. The set of
native items, like the set of native people, resets every time the Aegis
is recast. Items, however, cannot be invited into the Aegis.

The Aegis is often cast on the Winter Solstice, as the Magic aura may be
slightly higher, and this gives it a full year of duration. It is common
for the covenant to hold a celebration for all the covenfolk, and a full
council meeting for the magi, immediately after the Aegis is cast.

*Aegis of the Hearth* was created by Notatus, the first Primus of House
Bonisagus. It was a Major Breakthrough (see page @@), incorporating
Mercurian rituals as well as Hermetic theory, and was the reason Notatus
was chosen to succeed Bonisagus. As a result, the spell is more powerful
than it ought to be, and has no Perdo requisite. By 1220, Notatus\'s
discoveries have spread, and any magus in the Order is capable of
inventing versions of the Aegis with the above parameters, but different
levels or sizes, or both. Inventing a version with different parameters,
however, would require at least a Minor Breakthrough, and years of
research.

Circular Ward Against Demons

R: Touch, D: Ring, T: Circle

All creatures with Infernal Might equal to or less than or equal to the
level of the spell are unable to enter the circle or harm those within
it. If you cast the spell again, the stronger ring dispels the weaker,
regardless of the order of casting. Some magi cast this spell before
going to sleep at night. At night, from certain angles, the ring may be
seen as a silver-hued dome.

(Base spell)

Maintaining the Demanding Spell

R: Touch, D: Diam, T: Ind

You cast this spell on a spell that you have already cast and are
maintaining through concentration. The spell that requires concentration
is then automatically maintained for the duration of this spell, whether
you concentrate or not. You cannot change the effects of the first spell
without concentrating on it again. For instance, you can use *The Unseen
Arm* (ReTe 5) to hold an object in the air without concentrating, but to
move the object still requires concentration. A Stamina + Concentration
stress roll against an Ease Factor of 6 must be made in order to cast
this spell while keeping the first one going (a lower roll than normal
because this is what the spell is designed for). This spell only works
on spells of equal or lower level.

(Base effect, +1 Touch, +1 Diam)

Opening the Intangible Tunnel

R: Arc, D: Conc, T: Ind

You can open a magical channel from yourself to some target, allowing
you to cast any spell with a range greater than Personal on that target.
The tunnel does not, of itself, grant any sense impressions of the
target --- you must cast appropriate spells through it if you wish to
see. Spells cast through the tunnel cannot be of higher level than that
of this spell. You must make standard Concentration rolls to maintain
concentration on the Opening spell as you cast other spells.

A magus who magically recognizes the tunnel (through *The Invisible Eye
Revealed* or a similar spell) may cast spells through the tunnel back at
you, and he need not concentrate on keeping the tunnel open. If this
magus is the target of the tunneling spell, he is considered to be
touching you. Otherwise, his effective range to you is his range to the
target of the tunneling spell.

If the target of the spell has Magic Resistance, you must Penetrate that
resistance to open the tunnel. Spells cast through the tunnel must also
penetrate Magic Resistance normally.

(Base effect, +4 Arc, +1 Conc)

Suppressing the Wizard\'s Handiwork

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind

Cancels one spell that you have cast, but only as long as you
concentrate. When concentration is broken the effects of the spell
return. The level of the spell to be suppressed must be less than or
equal to the level of this spell. The effects of the spell being
suppressed take about one round to fade out, and then another round to
return after concentration is broken. The spell to be affected must be
active to be suppressed --- in particular, it may not be of Momentary
duration.

Common uses of this spell include providing access to some place
normally blocked by magic (for example, having a MuTe blocking the door
to your lab, and then suppressing it to enter), and avoiding traps (such
as suppressing a *Watching Ward* \[ReVi Gen\] on your rear door). This
spell is designed to be held while you do something else, so the magus
gets a +3 bonus to all Concentration rolls.

(Base, +1 Touch, +1 Conc)

Watching Ward

R: Touch, D: Spec, T: Ind, Ritual

*Watching Ward* puts another spell on a given target on hold until that
spell is triggered by a simple condition, which is determined when this
ritual is cast. The target of the *Watching Ward* must be present for
the entire casting ritual. When the conditions you specify come to pass,
the suspended spell takes effect.

Only one *Watching Ward* can be placed on any one person or object. The
level of the *Watching Ward* must at least equal the level of the spell
held in suspension. You can put multiple spells in the Ward, provided
that its level at least equals the sum of the levels of the contained
spells. If Intellego spells are included in a *Watching Ward*, they may
be used to trigger the other spells. Thus, if you put *Frosty Breath of
the Spoken Lie* (InMe 20) into the *Watching Ward*, you can also put in
a spell that is cast when someone lies. An Intellego spell in the
*Watching Ward* has no effect other than to cast other spells when the
proper condition is detected. Thus, in the example, one\'s breath is not
frosty when he or she is caught in a lie.

If someone tries to dispel the *Watching Ward* and fails, the suspended
spell is cast. Flambeau and Tytalus magi commonly put highly destructive
spells upon their persons, to be cast if they die so they may have
vengeance upon their killers. The Ritual nature of this spell supports
the potentially indefinite duration.

The *Watching Ward* is dispelled when it releases its spell.

A version of this spell with target Room, known as *Waiting Spell*, is
also well known in the Order. It can contain spells up to the level of
the *Waiting Spell* -- 10, and is also a Ritual.

(Base effect, +1 Touch, Duration is non-standard)

Level 15

Gather the Essence of the Beast

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

Concentrates the raw vis in a corpse into one part of that corpse, which
can then be removed. This spell lets you gather all the raw vis you find
without lugging around entire corpses of beasts. Note that the vis in
many magical creatures is already concentrated in this manner in some
specific organ, though this spell will allow you to relocate that vis if
you wish.

(Base 10, +1 Touch)
