Realms

Magic is the supernatural basis of Ars Magica, but it is not the only
power in Mythic Europe. Four realms of power exist: Magic, Divine,
Faerie, and Infernal. There also exists the mundane, that which is not
supernatural. The lines between realms are not drawn simply, with some
on one side and others representing a united opposition. Rather, each
has some influence over the rest.

Each realm has a distinctive aura, which covers some areas of the world.
Within an aura, one realm is stronger than the others, and this local
strength affects the use of the powers of other realms. These auras vary
in strength, and some only appear at particular times or under
particular circumstances.

Creatures can be linked to a realm in one of two ways. The closer link
is referred to as \'belonging to\' or \'being part of\' a realm. These
creatures are drawn from the realm\'s nature, and embody some aspect of
its power. The more distant link is referred to as \'alignment\' or
\'affiliation\'. A creature that is affiliated to a realm can draw on
the powers of that realm, but is not drawn from the realm\'s nature. A
creature that belongs to a realm cannot be affiliated with any other
realm. Most creatures belong to no realm, and can affiliate to more than
one. Magi, for example, are affiliated to the realm of Magic but do not
belong to it. Christian, Jewish, or Islamic magi are affiliated to the
Magic realm and the Divine realm, but, again, belong to neither. While
it is possible for animals, plants, or even stones, to become affiliated
to a realm, this is most common for human beings. All kinds of creatures
belong to the various realms.

No human being belongs to a realm. It is possible for a human affiliated
to a realm to transform and become part of that realm, but the person
apparently loses their humanity in the process. There are faeries,
demons, and spirits that were once human, but the Divine realm never
transforms human beings in this world. Perhaps the saints after death
become part of the Divine realm, but there is no way to know.

The Nature of the Realms

All four realms are inter-related, and Hermetic theorists have debated
the nature of these relations for centuries. It is generally agreed that
the Divine realm is more powerful than the other three, possibly
infinitely so. As Hermetic magi make use of the power of the Magic
realm, they tend to see that realm as more important than the Faerie and
Infernal realms. There are two popular views of the relationship between
the realms in the Order, one inspired by Platonic philosophy, the other
by Aristotelian.

The Platonic view sees the Divine realm as the source of light and being
for the universe. The Magic realm is the first emanation of the Divine
realm, pure light as emitted from the divine being. The Faerie and
Infernal realms both arise from the interaction of the divine light with
human beings. The Faerie realm is the reflection of this light from the
minds and souls of humankind, while the Infernal realm is the shadow
cast by humanity. Thus the Faerie realm tends to make the stories and
dreams of humanity real, while the Infernal contains all of humanity\'s
flaws made concrete.

The Aristotelian view sees things slightly differently. The Divine is
pure actuality, ultimate existence. The Magic realm is the process of
coming into existence, and thus always below the Divine but always
getting closer. The Faerie realm is the actualization of the imagination
of human beings, while the Infernal is the process of going out of
existence. Thus, demons always seek to destroy.

Hermetic theorists have also come up with much more personal theories,
but most magi hold some version of one of the two accounts given here,
when they think about the issue at all.

Those theologians who give serious thought to the issue tend to have a
slightly different view of the issue. They see the Divine as the
supernatural realm, the mundane as the natural realm, and Magic, Faerie,
and Infernal as together making up the preternatural realm. Opinions are
divided as to whether the three components of the preternatural realm
are actually distinct, and thus over whether there is really any
difference between the Infernal and the Magical. Even among those who
accept that the three preternatural realms are truly distinct, there is
a debate over whether magic is sinful, and incompatible with a truly
spiritual life, in itself.

Realm Auras

The realms exist and interact in various ways. Each has some parts of
the world where its powers are strongest. Such areas are said to have an
aura, which can be rated in power on a scale from 1 to 10. Most auras
rate between 1 and 5, while very intense auras may have a strength of 6
to 10. An aura rating of 10 often designates a gateway to the realm of
its affiliation. The aura rating of a given area usually acts as a
modifier on supernatural activities that take place there. Many areas of
the world have no realm affiliation, and therefore no aura. These places
are mundane.

Within a supernatural area, the aura rating is usually uniform, but
occasionally energy is unevenly concentrated, causing variable aura
ratings. Sometimes conditions result in the development of regiones,
areas of increasingly powerful aura sharing a single physical location
(see \"Regiones\" on page @@).

Two realms may have influence over the same place. When this is the
case, only the stronger can hold sway at any one time. A change in the
relative strengths of the two realms can cause an area to switch from
the influence of one to the other. For example, a village might be built
on the site of an ancient faerie mound. Normally, the area has a
Dominion aura (because the villagers are followers of the Church).
However, at night (when Dominion power wanes) or on the days of ancient
pagan holidays the Faerie aura becomes more powerful and holds sway.
Sometimes only a small area, like the cellar of a tavern, feels the
touch of a power different from that of its surroundings.

Realm Interaction

The aura of a given place affects all supernatural activities that go on
in that place. The list below defines how aura ratings affect various
activities. The Realm Interaction chart that follows indicates the
degree to which realms influence powers of other realms. The modifiers
shown apply to the effect an aura has on any supernatural act performed
within it.

Auras also affect the number of botch rolls for an attempted
supernatural act in a foreign realm. For each point of aura rating, roll
an extra botch die. Use the original aura rating, not that obtained
after multiplying by a factor in the Realm Interaction chart.

Realm Interaction Table

Power Used: Magic Divine Faerie Infernal

Aura Type

Magic + aura no effect + (1/2 aura) -- aura

Divine -- (3 x aura) + aura -- (4 x aura) -- (5 x aura)

Faerie + (1/2 aura) no effect + aura -- aura

Infernal -- aura no effect -- (2 x aura) + aura

For example, consider a magus who also has a Faerie-based power to
create illusions and a demonic gift causing sickness. His Hermetic
spells are based on Magic, his illusions on Faerie, and his sickness
power on the Infernal. In a town with a Dominion aura of 3, he must
subtract nine from his Hermetic totals, and roll three additional botch
dice, twelve from his Faerie illusion totals, with three additional
botch dice, and fifteen from his Infernal sickening totals, again with
three additional botch dice. If he moves to a forest with a Faerie aura
of 4, he adds two to his Hermetic totals, but rolls four additional
botch dice, four to his Faerie illusion totals, with no additional botch
dice, and subtracts four from his Infernal sickening totals, again with
four additional botch dice.

The Divine is not hampered by auras of other kinds. Divine powers have
no penalty and no additional botch dice in auras of the other realms.

Supernatural Activity Rolls Modified by Aura

Spellcasting rolls: The aura modifier modifies the Casting Score.

Laboratory activities: The aura modifier modifies the Lab Total.

Ability rolls: The aura modifier affects supernatural Abilities such as
Second Sight, or Wilderness Sense. Most such abilities are Magical in
origin, although in particular cases they may be Faerie, Infernal, or
even Divine.

Magic Resistance: Magic Resistance is altered by the aura modifier. This
includes Hermetic Magic Resistance due to the Parma Magica and Forms, as
well as the resistance of creatures with supernatural Might. Thus, a
magus in a Magic aura of 4 has a +4 bonus to his Magic Resistance, while
a demon has a --4 penalty.

Penetration: For magi and characters with mystical abilities, the aura
modifies the roll to use the ability, which means that Penetration is
modified. The aura modifier does not apply to Penetration twice. Thus, a
magus in a Divine aura of 2 takes a --6 penalty to his Casting Score.
This automatically reduces his Penetration, as that is calculated by
subtracting the spell level from the Casting Score. The aura modifier is
not subtracted again from the Penetration total. For supernatural
creatures, there is no roll to use the ability (see page @@), so the
aura modifier applies to Penetration directly.

Creatures of a Realm

The appearance of a creature is influenced, but not determined, by the
realm to which it belongs. The details on each of the realms, below,
provide further information on this. A creature\'s realm of origin does,
however, strongly affect the way it interacts with human beings.
Creatures of the Infernal are always interested in corrupting and
harming human beings, while creatures of the Magic realm need have no
interest in human beings for their own sake. Creatures of the Divine
serve God, and thus punish, aid, and reward humanity as commanded.
Creatures of Faerie all have some relationship with human beings, but
the nature of this relationship can vary wildly.

A talking dog, for example, could belong to any of the four realms. As a
Faerie, it might be the perfect hunting dog, leading its master on
apparently impossible hunts and lending its powers to ensure success. As
an Infernal beast, it would try to corrupt its master, leading him into
evil. A Divine talking dog would be a companion to its master, offering
guidance, but also driving him back from sin by force if necessary.
Finally, a Magical talking dog might have no interest at all in human
beings, being interested only in hunting for its food in the wilderness.

Magic Resistance and Penetration

Most creatures that belong to a realm have a Might Score, which
represents their power. The creature\'s Might Score is the maximum
level. Might points are also spent to invoke supernatural abilities, and
Might Pool is the amount of Might that a creature has remaining. Magic
Resistance and Penetration are both based on a creature\'s Might Score.

**Creature Magic Resistance: Might Score + Aura Modifier**

**Creature Penetration: Might Score -- (5 x Might Points spent on
power) + Penetration Bonus + Aura Modifier**

Magic Resistance based on might functions like Hermetic resistance,
resisting the powers of all realms, and all types of supernatural power.

Characters with supernatural abilities other than Hermetic magic also
have Penetration.

**Character Penetration: Effect Roll -- Ease Factor + Penetration
Bonus + Aura Modifier**

The Penetration bonus is calculated in the same way as for Hermetic magi
(see Penetration, page @@). Thus, creatures and characters without the
Penetration Ability have a Penetration bonus of zero.

The Magic Realm

The Magic realm is often characterized as \'the way the world could
be\'. Magical things are simply *better* than the mundane versions, but
they are better versions of mundane things, not completely new things.
There are often many ways in which a thing could be better, and magical
things better in each of those ways exist. *Realms of Power: Magic*
provides more detail on this realm.

Magical Creatures

Many magical creatures look like particularly fine specimens of mundane
things, and although they may have surprising abilities, such as
intelligence or the ability to move, these abilities are always suitable
to the kind of creature in question. The abilities of magical creatures
are explicable, at least after the event, in terms of the abilities of
the mundane version, although those abilities may be somewhat hidden.
For example, goat\'s blood can dissolve diamonds, but this ability is
only obvious in magical goats. Magical animals, so-called beasts of
virtue (see *Realms of Power: Magic,* pages 55--68), are the most
obvious magical creatures, but there are also magical plants, most
notably among the trees, and elementals, described in the Bestiary
chapter. On the whole, magical animals tend to be more intelligent and
have more personality than magical plants, which in turn are superior to
elementals in those respects. Some magical creatures are shapechangers,
and some of these can take on human form. The human form is almost never
the natural form of a shapechanger who belongs to the Magic realm,
however. The shapechangers are wolves who can become human, and so on.

The Magic realm also encompasses a wide range of spirits. Some are
spirits of natural substances, such as water and fire. These are
generally classed with elementals, although there is a difference in
that elementals are essentially physical, while spirits of the elements
are essentially spiritual. Since spirits of the elements can generally
create the physical element, this distinction is only of importance to
Hermetic magi deciding which Form to use to affect a creature. Other
magic spirits include spirits of natural places and natural phenomena,
such as the spirit of a mountain or of storms. Many powerful magical
spirits can take on any form they wish, including human form, and some
have powers based on several aspects of the Magic realm. These spirits
are normally completely indifferent to human beings, but some enter into
mutually profitable arrangements, particularly with humans who are
affiliated to the Magic realm in the first place.

Powerful spirits may take on forms that are completely alien to human
beings, and any creature that is powerful, alien, and indifferent to
human beings is part of the Magic realm. Such creatures are very rare,
but they do exist.

Human beings who have been transformed to become part of the Magic realm
are rare, but make up an important group of the realm\'s inhabitants.
Some of them are undead, such as ghosts and animated corpses, although
it is just as common for such creatures to be part of the Faerie or
Infernal realms. Others still appear human, but are not. Still others
have taken on different forms. Finally, some have become powerful
spirits. These creatures of magic have more interest in humans than most
others, as they were once human themselves. Some within the Order
believe that Hermes was originally a great human magician, who became a
spirit and was worshiped as a god by the Greeks and Romans.

It is relatively common for human beings to have supernatural powers
that derive from the Magic realm, and thus to be affiliated with that
realm. Hermetic magi are the most obvious example, but *Hedge Magic
Revised Edition* and *Rival Magic*, along with many other supplements,
contain further examples. There are human shapechangers who can change
into wolves, but the magical ones are affiliated with the realm, rather
than belonging to it.

Magical Auras

Magical areas are places that are more real than those around them.
Sometimes, after the working of powerful magic or the death of a
powerful creature, places acquire a magical aura, but most of the time
it is unclear why a certain place is magical. Most magical areas have an
aura from 1 to 5. Legendary places are rated around 6, while auras of
strength 10 are virtually unknown.

Magical areas are intense. Colors are more striking, sounds more
piercing, the day brighter, the night deeper. Magical creatures are
particularly common within them, although mobile creatures can wander
elsewhere. Immobile magical creatures, such as magical trees, are almost
never found outside a magical aura.

Almost all covenants are located in magical areas, usually with aura
ratings of 1 to 5. More powerful areas are not only rare but extremely
dangerous to live in. The powerful magic there is difficult and
dangerous to harness, and mundane covenfolk become warped and strange.
Apprentices are often overpowered. Because of this threat, only the most
powerful covenants in Hermetic history have based themselves in such
places. Powerful Magic auras are even richer in vis than normal ones,
however, so magi often want to visit such places.

Magical auras do not tend to have cyclical variations in strength with
time, in the way that other auras do, nor do they depend on the
surroundings, like Faerie auras. Much more detail is available in
chapter 2 of *Realms of Power: Magic.*

Sources of Magical Auras

There are two main ways in which Magical auras arise: from the
arrangement of the world, and from magical activities. Weak Magical
auras arise in places where the world has naturally become a
particularly fine example of something. A perfect mountain, spectacular
and ancient forest, and a vigorous active volcano might all acquire a
weak Magical aura, normally 1 and certainly no higher than 2. Stronger
auras arise from combinations of a superb location and auspicious
astrological alignments, or from a combination of excellent examples of
the natural world. For example, a coastal valley hemmed in by mountains,
in which great storms often happen and which faces the midsummer sunrise
might have a Magical aura as high as 4. These alignments never produce
an aura higher than 5, at least not by themselves, and such places are
popular sites for covenants, as they are easier to find than the other
kind.

Magical auras can also arise from magical activities. If a moderately
powerful (Might 30 or more) magical creature takes up residence in an
area, that place will, over the course of years, acquire a weak Magical
aura. Similarly, a place where magicians constantly work magic slowly
acquires an aura if it did not already have one. More powerful magical
creatures and more powerful magical events create stronger auras, but
generally no stronger than level 5.

Auras above level 5 almost always result from a combination of good
location and magical activities. If a covenant were established in a
location with a natural aura of 5, the aura would rise over the course
of decades, but not, in general, any higher than 7. The very highest
Magical auras result from spectacular magical events, such as a
spectacular magical fight between two powerful magical creatures in
which one of the creatures was killed, or the creation of a magical
effect worthy of legend. Such events can create an aura of 2 or 3 in a
previously mundane area, and if they take place in a location that
already has a strong Magical aura they can push it to the highest
levels.

The Magic World

There is great debate within the Order of Hermes over the existence of a
magical equivalent to Arcadia, Heaven, and Hell. Most magi think that
there must be one, and some even claim to have visited it. Others think
that those magi have either visited a powerful Magical regio, or have
decided to lie. It is rather difficult to see how a magus could
distinguish a large powerful regio from a part of a whole magical world,
which tends to prolong the debate.

Other magi hold that, while there is a Magic world, it cannot be
visited. Some say that it is the realm of Twilight, so it cannot be
visited safely, others that it is the realm of the Platonic Forms, where
the perfect exemplars for all earthly things are found. Still others
argue that, as the Magic realm is constituted by striving towards the
Divine, or by the first emanation from the Divine, the Magic world is
Heaven. Some of these also believe that Twilight is the Magic world, so
that Final Twilight is a way for magi to enter Heaven.

As described in chapter 3 of *Realms of Power: Magic,* there is a Magic
world, and Hermetic magi could visit it. They simply have not, in 1220.
The magi in your saga might well be the first.

The Infernal Realm

The Infernal realm is the embodiment of evil and decay --- of physical
destruction and moral corruption. Even as the Church works its divine
power to protect the soul and buoy it up to Heaven after the body\'s
death, the forces of the Devil work to steal it away and drag it to the
depths of Hell.

Human beings are subject to death and damnation through the sins of
their ancestral parents. Once Adam and Eve had tasted the fruit of the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, all the world came under Satan\'s
influence.

Demons are fallen angels; they cannot and will not be redeemed because
of their very natures. They comprehend the divine order completely and
so can never be convinced by new arguments or perspectives to seek
salvation. Their envy of humanity\'s place in the cosmos is without
bounds, as is their capacity for evil as rejection of all that is from
God. Ultimately, devils seek to weigh down souls with the baggage of
sin. They have an eternity to plot and scheme, and a human lifetime is a
brief moment in their eyes. Fortunately for humanity, they are
completely without virtue, including the virtues of patience and
self-control, which makes it hard for them to sustain elaborate plans.

Hell\'s most potent allies are diabolists, humans who sell their souls
in return for powers and favors on Earth. Not only do devils win these
souls away from the Divine, they are also able to satisfy their lust for
chaos, destruction and suffering through these human agents. The powers
that diabolists are awarded can include spell-like abilities and the
capacity to summon demons and use them to their own ends, among other
things. Diabolists are not completely without virtue, and are indeed
capable of redemption, which means that they can provide the patience
and self-control that demons lack.

Not surprisingly, the Order of Hermes forbids dealings with demonkind.
Any member caught engaging in diabolism is renounced and singled out for
destruction. Furthermore, the Church brings down great punishments on
those thought or known to be in league with the Devil.

Hell is not a remote force in Mythic Europe. Demons ruin crops, cause
back pains, make the wind howl, and manipulate emotions. Some
theologians suggest that it is impossible to drop a needle from the roof
of a house without hitting an invisible demon in pursuit of a plan of
evil.

More details on the Infernal and all its works can be found in *Realms
of Power: The Infernal.*

Infernal Creatures

The natural forms of infernal creatures are almost always twisted, vile,
and terrifying, the better to inspire fear and loathing in human beings.
However, many demons can also take on attractive forms. Different sorts
of attraction are better for different temptations; a beautiful young
woman is good for luring a man into lust, but an apparently wise old man
might be better to lure someone into heresy.

The lies of creatures that belong to the Infernal realm cannot be
detected by the powers of the Magic realm. Deceit is a central part of
their nature, and hard to overcome. Some diabolists claim that infernal
power can pierce infernal lies, but most magi believe that the demons
are lying to their servants. The Divine can pierce infernal deceptions,
and it seems that some faeries can also do so. This ability to lie with
impunity also makes demons hard to detect; they can choose to tell the
magic that they are not there, and the magic will believe them.

This does not mean that it is impossible to spot demonic lies by any
means. Normal investigation will still reveal whether things are as a
demon says, unless the demon has made the effort to fake mundane
information as well.

Infernal Auras

Infernal areas are among the most vile places in the world. Growth of
natural plants is stunted and warped. Decay and the stench of ill humors
abound. Predatory animals kill, not for survival, but for the pleasure
of inflicting pain. Most earthbound demons, and many diabolists, prefer
to remain in such areas. They are also typical sites for diabolic
churches and covens, and for the summoning of demons.

Travelers in or near Infernal areas often find themselves in foul moods.
Outlaws on nearby roads act in particularly harsh fashion-the effects of
demonic influence in high concentration. Old wounds, especially those
received through malevolence, hurt anew. Old conflicts and personality
clashes are remembered again, and possibly re-enacted. Of greater
concern to magi, Infernal auras interfere with the use of magic.

Infernal auras can be detected by magic, unless an infernal creature is
actively hiding their existence. They also tend to reduce in strength
during the day, and particularly on holy days, and to increase in power
at night. Infernal auras are particularly strong on Easter Saturday, the
day between the Crucifixion and the Resurrection. More detail can be
found in *Realms of Power: The Infernal,* pages 10--17.

Sources of Infernal Auras

Infernal auras arise from sinful activities and from the activities of
demons and diabolists. Minor sins, of the sort that people commit every
day, do not create an Infernal aura, fortunately. More serious sins,
such as vicious murders, or elaborate schemes to corrupt someone, can
leave a trace. A single sin only creates an aura if it is particularly
vile. The calculated desecration of a church, including the ritual
murder of the priest on the altar, might replace the church\'s Divine
aura with a level 1 Infernal aura. In an area with no aura, a cruel and
premeditated murder can create a level 1 aura. Repeated sins in one
place create Infernal auras, even if the individual sins are less
serious. For example, if a pair of adulterers met every couple of days
in the same room in order to indulge their sin, that room would slowly
acquire a weak Infernal aura, which might reach level 2 if the affair
continued for long enough. Repeated ritual sacrifices of human beings to
demons, extending over many decades, could create an Infernal aura as
high as 5.

Infernal auras also arise from the presence of infernal creatures or the
use of infernal powers, in much the same way as for Magical auras.
Combining repeated sin with the use of infernal powers can create the
highest Infernal auras of all.

The Faerie Realm

Faeries are creatures drawn in some way from the stories of the human
race. They are thus as varied and diverse as stories, and can be found
anywhere from the depths of the wilderness to the centers of cities,
from ancient pagan temples to the newest cathedral.

The realm of Faerie is as diverse and strange as those who inhabit it,
and as with all faerie things, appearances can be deceiving. After dawn
breaks, a pile of gold may prove nothing more than old leaves, while a
single oak leaf can hold within it more magical power than the enchanted
staff of a mighty magus.

Much more detail about the Faerie realm can be found in *Realms of
Power: Faerie.*

Faerie Creatures

The special relationship that faeries have to humanity means that all
faeries are interested in people. They are interested in having humans
play out their stories, because faeries gain energy, called Vitality,
when this happens. Unlike demons, they do not want humans to be
corrupted or destroyed for the sake of corruption, but some faeries do
want humans to suffer, if the story calls for it. Other faeries live in
imitation or mockery of human beings, and they respond to human
intruders as appropriate to their role, bringing the visitors into their
story.

Not all faeries know that they are telling a story, and the faerie may
be the victim in a story. For example, a faerie may be the giant that is
tricked by a clever mortal child. In that case, the faerie, consciously
or unconsciously, arranges things so that the child can trick it and
survive. If it catches the child or sees through the trick, it does not
get any Vitality. This close link to stories means that faeries are very
hard to predict if you do not know what their story is --- and very easy
to manipulate if you do. Nevertheless, a faerie that tells the story of
the Wild Hunt carrying people away and driving them mad may remain very
dangerous even when you know exactly what it is.

Faeries cannot truly create or change without mortal assistance.
However, a faerie might be able to make wine with a word and change its
form from moment to moment, as the wine is actually a transformation of
something, and the form of the faerie is essentially mutable. It seems
to be absolutely true that faeries cannot reproduce themselves, or
learn, without mortal aid, and in these cases things do not even appear
otherwise.

Faerie creatures can take any imaginable form. This includes appearing
as better versions of mundane animals, but also includes giants,
chimerae, and humans with animal features. Since faeries arise from the
stories of humanity, it is not uncommon for legends about a magical
place to give rise to a faerie copy, more closely matching the beliefs
that people have. However, although faeries arise from the beliefs of
people, they do not always go away or change to match changing beliefs.
Once the faeries exist, they are just as real as any other creature, and
can, with the help of humans, develop in unexpected ways.

Faerie Auras

Areas of faerie power may cover ancient pagan lands, spring up about
faerie monarchs, or protect valued locations. They may have only a few
inhabitants, each quite powerful. On the other hand, they may be the
domiciles of innumerable faeries with little power individually, but
whose numbers give them strength enough to be respected and avoided.

Faerie areas with lower level auras tend to be inhabited by faeries that
are merely annoying, or barely more than helpful; they are almost never
capable of killing. Such places are relatively common wherever mortals
have spread their influence. On the other hand, especially in rural
areas, there are auras of immense power inhabited by faeries that can
will themselves taller than a church spire or shake the Earth\'s
foundation at a command.

Sites of Faerie aura take as many forms as their inhabitants. They might
contain talking trees and owls, strange lights at night, and unearthly
eyes peering out of the darkness. An aura may exceed the physical bounds
of the locale, depending on how far the resident faeries journey or
extend their power.

Regardless of the danger, magi often risk entering Faerie areas in
pursuit of magical power. They are places rich in vis --- reason enough
to challenge many perils, particularly for a magus deprived of magical
resources.

Faerie auras tend to vary in strength depending on how closely the
surrounding world matches the nature of the faeries within. Thus, a
Faerie aura inhabited by beautiful faeries of light would reduce in
power during winter and at night, and reach its full power on bright
summer days. An aura inhabited by faerie miners would lose strength if
there were no miners nearby, but return to full power if a mine was
opened. More details on Faerie auras can be found in *Realms of Power:
Faerie,* pages 14--18.

Sources of Faerie Auras

Faerie auras can arise from the presence of faeries or the use of faerie
powers in a way similar to the ways that Magical and Infernal auras can
arise. Faerie auras also arise when stories are told about a place. The
strength of the aura depends on the popularity and number of the
stories, but also on what is already in a place. For example, many
people in western Mythic Europe tell marvelous stories about
Constantinople, but as the city is full of people and churches these
stories have not created a Faerie aura there. On the other hand, stories
about the strange beings who live in the depths of a forest often create
auras, as no-one lives in the forest to say otherwise. The combination
of these effects means that Faerie auras are often in wilderness areas,
even though faeries depend, in some sense, on human beings.

Faerie auras tend to be higher than other kinds of aura, as the two
factors reinforce one another. Faeries in an area tend to inspire
stories about the area, which in turn raise the aura and attract, or
create, more and more powerful faeries, who in turn inspire more
stories.

The Faerie Realm

The most powerful Faerie sites are sometimes gateways to the Faerie
Realm. Such gateways may be small and unassuming, rarely used and little
known, or massive entrances traversed by the greatest of faerie
entities. Mortals do not naturally belong in the land of the fay, and
those who enter often fail to return. Even if they do come back, they
may find a day spent in Faerie is one, ten, even a hundred years, or
only a minute, in the mundane world. Magi of House Merinita say that the
Faerie Realm can be divided into three "regions", although they are not
geographic divisions: Arcadia, Elysium, and Eudokia.

Arcadia is best described as stories made real. The impossible city
paved with gold is found in Arcadia, as is the enormous forest inhabited
by talking animals. Everything plays its role within a story of some
sort, and all stories can be found here. Elysium is the land of myths,
the home of gods and heroes, and Eudokia is the land of tales that teach
a lesson.

The Faerie Realm is a physical place, but it is also a sphere of pure
enchantment and imagination. Movement is not easily described, being
more like the half-remembered travels of a dream, and so magi of House
Merinita (who know best) scoff at the idea of making a map of it. Like a
dream state, Faerieland is often incomprehensible to mortals who go
there. There is not always a logical relationship between cause and
effect, and it is easy to become totally disoriented, especially as
faeries enjoy using their glamor to lead intruders astray. And yet, some
Merinita magi insist that the Faerie Realm is not a chaotic place, but
merely has its own rules. Whether this is true or not, the realm is best
left to faeries, and to the foolish among mortals.

The Divine Realm

The Divine realm is the manifestation of the supernatural power of God.
The most obvious agent of the Divine in western Europe is the Church,
and Divine auras, also called the Dominion, or Dominion auras, surround
its buildings. The Church does not have a monopoly on Divine auras, as
Jews and Muslims also live within a Dominion aura, which appears
indistinguishable from that of the Church. The Church, of course,
refuses to believe that Islam has anything to do with God, and has
severe doubts about contemporary Judaism.

Regardless of opinions, it cannot be denied that the Divine realm has an
influence over the other realms, including that of Magic. A Divine aura
limits the efficiency and effectiveness of Hermetic magic, and Divine
miracles can accomplish feats that magi cannot.

At its best, the Dominion allows the human soul to express its deepest
beauty. At its worst, the Church is a repressive force that treads on
liberal thought. It makes sense, then, that it is the Church which is
the driving force behind the Crusades while it produces the most
delightful music, the most enchanting art, and the most transcendent
philosophy.

The power of the Church and the boundaries it imposes on the Order of
Hermes cause some magi to scorn the Divine. Some magi find pagan
religions, based as they are on Faerie or Magical power, more congenial,
while others simply have as little as possible to do with religion.
Nevertheless, many magi are Christians, with a scattering of Jews and a
significant number of Muslims in those tribunals which extend over
Islamic lands. Some magi even have True Faith (see page @@), which does
not seem to hinder their magic.

More detail about the supernatural aspects of the Divine can be found in
*Realms of Power: The Divine*, along with information about the three
most important Divine religions in Mythic Europe: Christianity, Islam,
and Judaism.

Divine Auras

The Dominion is nearly ubiquitous, and is the only supernatural power
that the common folk generally have contact with. It affects magi and
their fellows whenever they enter a village, town, or city where there
is a place of worship, an ordained priest, and a body of believers.

Though Divine auras are almost always present in areas inhabited by
believers, their strength can vary. On Sundays and holy days the power
of the Dominion increases; at night and on evil days it wanes. The
Dominion is also focused more strongly in places and objects that are
strongly associated with faith. People, places, and things that have
been blessed by an ordained priest can carry Divine auras, but these are
extremely fragile and vanish once exposed to the sinful world. Divine
auras somehow transported to another realm are also swallowed by the
alien aura.

Entering a strong Divine aura has a definite sensory association.
Non-magical people often experience anticipatory nerves and unconscious
reverence. Those who are pious feel quiet peace; others feel dread and
guilt. Magi and others with magical talents instantly sense a powerful
presence, their Gift flickering as a flame exposed to wind. Auras of
lesser power might prove a mild irritant to such magical folk, perhaps
causing occasional headaches, short tempers and sporadic feelings of
physical discomfort.

Sources of Divine Auras

Divine auras can arise from the activities or presence of holy
creatures, in a manner similar to the ways in which other auras arise.
The overwhelming majority of Divine auras, however, arise from the
presence of faithful worshipers of the Divine. Typically, the fields
around a village would have an aura of 1, while the village itself would
have an aura of 2. A town or city would have an aura of 3 over most of
the area, possibly lower in areas where sin and vice are common. Most
places of worship have an aura of 4, while places with wider
significance, such as cathedrals, important mosques, and the churches of
major monasteries, have an aura of 5.

Higher Divine auras are very limited in extent. The chapel holding the
relics of a very important saint might have an aura of 6, or 7 for
relics of Christ or the Virgin Mary. The site of a saint\'s martyrdom
generally has an aura of 8, nine for the martyrdom of an apostle. Divine
auras of 10 arise in places where God Himself has intervened in a direct
way. The Holy Sepulcher, where Christ was buried, the ka\'aba in Mecca,
and the last remnants of the Jewish temple in Jerusalem are examples.
There are occasional examples elsewhere; for example, the Lady Chapel at
Glastonbury Abbey in England was originally consecrated by Christ
Himself, and has an aura of 10.

Particular Divine auras may depart from these guidelines, as God makes
them where and how He wants. However, the guidelines given here are the
ones that He normally seems to follow. While He could withdraw all of
the Divine aura from a cathedral, He almost never does so. For more
details on Divine auras, see *Realms of Power: The Divine Revised
Edition,* pages 10--17.

True Faith

Those who give up mundane pursuits entirely and selflessly dedicate
themselves to leading holy lives benefit from True Faith. True Faith is
measured in Faith Points, which represent a person\'s connection to God.
Those with True Faith may be Jewish, Christian, or Muslim, and, it
seems, need not be wholly orthodox.

True Faith, like Confidence, has a Score and Points. Taking the True
Faith Major Virtue grants you a True Faith Score of 1, and a single
Faith Point. Only by possessing the True Faith Major Virtue may a
character have a True Faith score. Any character may possess any number
of Faith Points (gained through the sacraments, a pilgrimage, or other
holy endeavors) that once spent, do not return.

You may spend Faith Points like Confidence Points (and may spend as many
Faith Points at once as your True Faith Score), as long as you are
acting in accordance with God's will. If you do not possess a True Faith
Score, then you may only spend one Faith Point at a time.

A character with Faith Points but no True Faith Score does not benefit
from Magic Resistance. A character with a True Faith Score gains Magic
Resistance equal to this score multiplied by ten.

**True Faith Magic Resistance: True Faith Score x 10**

Each dawn, you regain a number of Faith Points up to your True Faith
Score, although if you already have more Faith Points than your True
Faith Score, you do not gain additional Points.

For more details on True Faith, see *Realms of Power: The Divine Revised
Edition,* page 56.

Relics

Relics are physical objects that, in some way, house part of the power
of the Divine. They are most common in Christianity, and often take the
form of parts of the bodies of deceased saints. All relics have a number
of common powers, listed below:

1\. **Faith:** All relics contain a True Faith score, giving it Faith
Points that may be used by its bearer as Confidence. A relic also grants
Magic Resistance equal to ten times its True Faith score to its bearer.
A person can only benefit from one relic at a time; any attempt to do
otherwise is a sin, and means that they lose the benefits of all relics.
However, a person can humbly carry other relics, while only relying on
one for the benefits. A character who normally relies on a particular
relic would need a very good reason to swap it for another one.

2\. **Divine Might:** All relics have a Divine Might score, which limits
how often their powers may be used (effectively preventing characters
from over-using their powers). The Might score also acts as Magic
Resistance for the relic against any spells or supernatural effects that
target it directly. A relic's Divine Might is equal to the relic's Faith
score (or highest Faith score, if more than one applies) multiplied by
10, and the Might Pool is refreshed with every sunrise.

3\. **Scourging the Infernal:** As supremely holy items, relics are
anathema to demons and their followers. Relics radiate an aura of
hostility to such creatures that extends a number of feet equal to the
Might score of the relic. Any creatures belonging to the Infernal realm
that seek to enter this aura will be unable to do so if their Infernal
Might does not exceed the Divine Might of the relic. Should they succeed
in entering the aura, every round that they remain within it they will
be assailed by divine energies causing an amount of damage equal to the
Might of the relic, although their Soak still protects them as normal.
The assault is accompanied by suitably dramatic visual effects, such as
holy fire, lightning, or whatever the storyguide feels is appropriate.
It ends as soon as they leave the aura. This power does not affect
characters or creatures merely affiliated with the Infernal realm,
though they will feel discomfort if they handle the relics for extended
periods of time.

In addition, some relics have powers specific to them. In the case of
relics of saints, these powers usually match those of the saint to whom
they once belonged. In the case of other relics, the powers are
conferred directly by Divine Will. Two sample powers are given here;
more can be found on pages 88 and 89 of *Realms of Power: The Divine
Revised Edition.*

*The Faithful Made Whole*, 4 points, Init +15, Corpus. This power cures
the recipient of all disease and heals all physical wounds.

*Flabbergast the Impertinent*, 2 points, Init +3, Mentem. This curse
causes the target to fall into a deep sleep, lasting the night, and
accompanied by loud snores. The sleeper will wake in the morning
exhausted from his snoring, down two long-term Fatigue levels. No magic
can prematurely wake the sleeper.

Magic Resistance For Church Officers and Sovereigns

The Divine protects the ordained and anointed leaders of Mythic Europe
from interference by other supernatural powers. The religious and
secular leaders listed below receive a Magic Resistance score as listed
here, and a Soak bonus equal to Magic Resistance / 5. Excommunication
cancels these benefits (but only if the excommunication is God's will).
Those listed here also have a Penetration 0 *Aura of Rightful Authority*
extending to Voice Range. Roughly speaking, a legatus a latere is a
cleric authorized to act on behalf of the Pope, with his power. A
legatus missus has the same authorization, but for a single purpose. For
more details, see *The Church,* page 31*.*

Pope 25

Cardinal or Legatus a latere 20

Legatus missus 15

Archbishop 10

King (once crowned) 10

Wives gain Magic Resistance equal to their husbands'.

Magic Resistance from relics is added to the above, but does not affect
Soak.

Miracles

Miracles are the direct intervention of God in the world. As such, they
can do anything, cannot fail, and cannot be resisted by any other power.
More discussion of their role in the setting can be found in the Mythic
Europe chapter, on page @@.

The Mundane

The mundane is the embodiment of all that is normal and mortal.
Generally speaking, areas not occupied by another realm are considered
mundane and consist of ordinary people and places. The mundane has no
aura rating --- in fact, it is the absence of aura, so powers used there
function without hindrance.

There is a difference between \"mundane society\" and mundane areas.
Mundane society comprises the everyday folk of Mythic Europe, including
peasants, townsfolk, and nobility. These people, not being supernatural,
would seem to belong to the mundane. However, widespread belief in God,
and the fact that most settlements are within the Dominion, means that
most \"mundanes\" actually share somewhat in the Divine. Only complete
outsiders who lack faith are truly to be considered part of the mundane.

Regiones

Occasionally, within very special supernatural areas, special types of
auras arise. These may exist within larger domains or by themselves, and
may be of any type of aura. They are called regiones (singular regio,
\"realm\", pronounced \'REH-ghee-oh\' and \'reh-ghee-OH-nays\', with a
hard \'g\' in both cases).

Regiones consist of several levels of aura, layered one on top of
another in order of increasing power; the lowest level is connected to
the mundane world. To picture this phenomenon, imagine a building with
multiple floors. The ground floor is the level of the regio connected to
the mundane world, while the higher floors are the higher levels of the
regio. To climb, you must use the stairs, and to do that you must know
where they are, or wander around until you bump into them. The higher
floors have higher auras, and so have more characteristics of their
realm.

Just as the various floors of a building occupy the same spot of ground,
so do the various levels of a regio occupy the same bit of space. It is
entirely possible to pass through the bottom level of a regio without
realizing that there are more levels than meet the eye.

Regiones have inhabitants, just like other areas of supernatural aura.
These beings tend to cluster on specific levels, though they can cross
level boundaries freely. The higher one travels in the regio, the
stranger and more supernaturally aligned its inhabitants become.

Entering and Leaving Regiones

Any character crossing the boundary of a regio disappears from the
normal world and enters a supernatural realm. There are three ways to
enter most regiones: being led, entering voluntarily, and getting lost.

Any being native to a regio and part of or affiliated to the realm can
lead any number of characters to any level of the regio. Magi are
affiliated to the Magic realm, and if they live in a Magical regio they
count as native to that regio.

There are two ways to enter a regio voluntarily, and either or both may
apply to a particular regio. The first involves seeing into the regio
and then crossing the boundary. This requires some supernatural ability.
Second Sight allows a character to see into any regio, as does Magic
Sensitivity. Sense Holiness and Unholiness allows a character to see
into Divine and Infernal regiones.

To see into a regio level, roll:

**Regio sight roll: Perception + Appropriate Ability + Stress Die**

**Ease Factor: 5 + (2 x difference between current level\'s aura and
sought level\'s aura)**

If you are in an aura different from the aura of the regio, add the
current aura and the aura of the regio level to determine the Ease
Factor. Thus, the Ease Factor to see from a level 3 Divine aura into a
level 5 Magic regio is 21; the difference between these two auras is 8.
The Ease Factor may be modified by large amounts on particular days or
by particular activities.

Anyone who can see the next level of a regio can lead any number of
people into it.

The second way of entering involves following a particular path or
ritual. Sometimes, following the path is enough by itself, and no rolls
are needed. In other cases, the rolls specified for seeing into a regio
must still be made, but unless the path is followed there is no chance
of success. The path can be as simple as walking seven times clockwise
around a hill, or as complex as desired, possibly only being available
on a particular day, or to a particular kind of person. Some regiones
are all but impossible to enter.

Finally, if a character gets lost near a regio boundary, he may
accidentally enter the regio. Roll as normal, except that if the
character does not have a relevant Ability this merely counts as zero.

At least one of these methods of entry must apply to any regio, at least
if it is to have any impact on the game. There are some regiones into
which you must be led by a native, and others into which you cannot be
led, or enter voluntarily, but rather must get lost. Natives of a regio
can almost always enter and leave freely, but even then there are
exceptions. The most secure location possible for a covenant is a regio
which people can only enter by being led, but getting into such a regio
in the first place is very difficult.

Magic In Regiones

Supernatural powers or spells used in a regio level are affected just as
in any other aura, determined by the Realm Interaction Table. Use the
aura rating of the level occupied to modify spell and other supernatural
rolls. However, any power used within a regio of a realm different from
that of the power attracts twice the normal number of botch dice.

The Origins of Regiones

Regiones arise in several ways, but two appear to be the most common.
First, an inhabited aura might be surrounded by an aura of a different
type, and slowly compressed. Sometimes, the aura simply disappears, but
if the inhabitants are strong enough the besieged aura might move up
into a regio, leaving a lower level aura in contact with the new aura.
One or two Hermetic covenants have entered regiones in this way. When
this happens the old contents of the aura are normally found on the new
regio level, while the base level contains ruined and decaying versions
of any buildings.

The other common route is through a spectacular and powerful event.
Sometimes, instead of raising the prevailing aura, these events create a
new regio level at a higher aura. This sort of event often duplicates
all the mundane structures, and people may start scattered between the
two new levels. Again, one or two Hermetic covenants have entered
regiones in this way.

Hermetic magi would love to be able to create regiones at will, but they
have yet to learn how. Attempts to create regiones through spectacular
magical events have not succeeded reliably, and have often had very bad
consequences.

Vis Sources

Raw vis (see page @@) can often be found in supernatural auras.
Sometimes it is found in the bodies of creatures with Might, sometimes
it is found in plants, or rocks, or even in the breeze. Often, once the
vis has been gathered, it does not get replaced naturally. Sometimes,
however, it is possible to take a certain number of pawns of vis from a
place every year. These places are known as vis sources, and they are
among a covenant\'s most important assets.

A vis source can produce vis associated with any Art, but a single vis
source normally produces a single kind of vis. Vis sources can also
produce any amount of vis, although sources providing more than six
pawns per year are rare. Some vis sources produce a varying number of
pawns each year, but normally somewhere between one and ten.

The vis produced by a vis source needs to be gathered. Sometimes this is
a simple matter. The vis might be in the three golden acorns that appear
on a tree, and all that is required is to pick those three acorns.
Sometimes it is easy provided that you can detect vis. The vis might
take the form of ordinary-looking leaves on the tree, so that you have
to know which are vis to know which to pick. Finally, spells might be
needed to gather the vis at all. For example, the vis might be in the
breeze that blows through the branches of the tree at sunrise on the
summer solstice.

Tainted Vis

Vis found in non-Magic auras may be tainted by its aura of origin.
Faerie vis is generally safe for magi to use, although sometimes it may
have strange side effects. It does not, however, tend to distort spells
or have bad effects on the magi using it. More details can be found in
*Realms of Power: Faerie,* pages 18--19.

Divine vis makes most magi nervous. First, gathering it often has the
potential to annoy the Church. Second, using it in magic seems somehow
sacrilegious to many magi, who'd rather not invite Divine retribution.

Infernal vis is avoided by all sensible magi. It tends to twist any
project to evil ends, and slowly corrupt a magus\'s personality as he
works with it. At the very least, using Infernally tainted vis adds
twice as many botch dice as usual to spellcasting, and requires a roll
on the experimental results chart for an enchanted item. Magi should be
very wary of discoveries made while working with Infernal vis. For
information on just how bad it can get, see *Realms of Power: The
Infernal,* pages 18--19.

Sample Vis Sources

Golden acorns on a tree (Creo, Herbam, Terram)

The bones of people buried in an old pagan graveyard, as long as they
were buried within the last year. (Perdo, Corpus, Mentem)

The first ice to form on a pond in winter. (Rego, Aquam)

The chrysalis cases of butterflies in a magical forest. (Muto, Animal,
Imaginem)

The echoes of a shout in a particular valley at a particular time.
(Intellego, Imaginem)

The wind fanning a fire in a magical forest. (Auram, Ignem)

Stones in strange shapes, found in a deep labyrinth of caves. (Imaginem,
Terram, Vim)

Crystals that diffract the light in dazzling and beautiful ways, growing
on the peak of a mountain. (Ignem, Imaginem, Vim)

Catkins that look like kittens in moonlight. (Animal)

Dust that gathers over months on a cobweb in a particular location in
the covenant. (Vim)
