Bestiary

Creatures in an Ars Magica game serve a variety of purposes. The
simplest is something to fight, but this may not be the most common.
Most supernatural creatures are intelligent, and thus can be bargained
with, talked to, or even come to the player characters for help. It\'s
at least as interesting to have a dragon ask the characters to defeat a
knight, as to have a knight ask the characters to defeat a dragon. It is
best to think of creatures as characters in the game, rather than as
obstacles to be overcome.

In most cases, the storyguide will want to create creatures that fit a
particular role in his story, so this chapter provides a range of
examples from the four realms, to help spark your inspiration. This
doesn\'t even approach an exhaustive listing of possible creatures, and
the creatures given here might well not exist in your game. Further
creatures can be found in many of the supplements for **Ars Magica**,
particularly the *Realms of Power* books and the regional sourcebooks.

Creature statistics are very similar to human statistics. The main
differences are the Might Score, which determines the overall power of
the creature and indicates the realm to which it is affiliated, and
creature Powers, which work differently from supernatural abilities
possessed by humans. Both of these differences are described below.

Creature Might

Supernatural creatures have one of Divine Might, Infernal Might, Magic
Might, and Faerie Might, depending on the realm to which they belong.
Might Score is very important, as it provides Magic Resistance, fuels
the creature\'s powers, and determines the Penetration of those powers.
The higher the Might Score, the more powerful the creature.

All powers have a Might cost, although sometimes it is zero. A creature
that hasn\'t used any powers recently has a Might Pool equal to its
Might Score. To use a power, it spends the appropriate number of points
from the Might Pool. If the Might Pool doesn\'t have enough points in to
use a power, the creature cannot use that power.

Might Pools almost always refresh to the creature\'s Might Score over
the course of a day. Unless otherwise noted, the Pool refreshes at a
constant rate, so that a creature with a Might Score of 25 regains a
point in a little under an hour. If a creature\'s pool refreshes in a
different manner, this is noted in the creature\'s description.

Creature Magic Resistance works against all forms of mystical power,
just like Hermetic Magic Resistance. It is equally helpless against
direct Divine miracles.

**Creature Magic Resistance: Might Score + Aura Modifier**

Creature Powers

Creature powers are not Hermetic spells, and thus are not bound by the
restrictions of Hermetic magic. For a start, they do not have levels.
Instead, every power has a Might cost, which is deducted from the
creature\'s Might Pool when the power is used. Further, creature powers
need not use the standard Hermetic ranges, durations, and targets.
Nevertheless, Hermetic spells are a good source of inspiration for
creature powers, and \'like this spell, apart from\...\' is a very good
way to describe a new power.

The format for a creature power is as follows:

*Power Name,* X points, Init Y, Form: Description.

The name is simply descriptive. X is the number of points the creature
must spend from its Might Pool to use the power. Init is the Initiative
modifier for the power; this determines when it is used in combat. The
Form is the Hermetic Form that provides Magic Resistance against the
power.

The description is everything else; what the power does, and the game
mechanics, if necessary, for its effects.

The Penetration of a creature\'s powers depends on the creature\'s Might
Score and on the number of points spent to use the power.

**Creature Power Penetration: Might Score -- (5 x Might Point cost of
the power) + Penetration Bonus**

The Penetration Bonus is calculated in exactly the same way as for
Hermetic magi (see page @@), so if the creature does not have the
Penetration Ability, it is zero.

Some creature powers can be dispelled, if they have continuing effects.
Their effective level is equal to the Might Score of the creature.

**Creature Power Level for Dispelling: Creature\'s Might Score**

Creature Format

The format for a creature is very similar to the format for a character,
and uses a lot of the same rules and values. In most cases, if a line
does not apply, it is omitted. Sometimes it is left in, with an
explanation of why it does not apply, if that would be clearer.

**(Realm) Might:** The creature\'s Might Score. For mundane creatures,
this line is omitted. The Form with which the creature is associated,
for warding purposes, appears in brackets after the Might Score.

**Characteristics:** A list of the characteristics and values. Creatures
with animal intelligence have a Cunning (Cun) score rather than an
Intelligence score.

**Size:** The creature\'s size. Size 0 is the same size (volume, and
thus normally roughly mass) as an adult human being. An increase or
decrease of three points of Size is approximately equivalent to a factor
of ten change in size.

Size Examples

Each Size category is approximately twice as heavy as the previous size
category. A 1-point difference in Size doubles the weight, 2 points
multiplies it by five, and a 3-point increase in Size entails a ten-fold
increase in mass. Thus a pig weighs approximately the same as 50
hedgehogs, 200 rats or 2000 mice. Birds are two Size points bigger than
their weight would suggest, accounting for their larger overall
dimension; if you need to know the weight of a bird, subtract two from
the Size before calculation. All heights and weights are approximate.

**Size Height Weight Examples**

--15 an inch or less less than 1 oz. insect

--10 4 -- 5 in. 1 oz. minnow, mouse

--9 6 -- 7 in. 1.5 oz. bat, frog

--8 8 -- 9 in. 0.25 -- 0.5 lbs mole, salamander, toad

--7 10 -- 11 in. 0.5 -- 1 lb rat, weasel

--6 12 -- 13 in. 1 -- 2 lbs lizard, stoat, thrush

--5 14 -- 15 in. 2 -- 5 lbs cuckoo, dove, eel, polecat, grass snake,
hedgehog, partridge, rabbit

--4 16 -- 20 in. 5 -- 10 lbs adder, cockerel, crow, magpie, octopus,
owl, raven

--3 21 -- 32 in. 10 -- 22 lbs badger, carp, cat, duck, falcon, gull,
hare, human baby, osprey, otter, pike

--2 2\'9\" -- 3\'9\" 22 -- 46 lbs beaver, dog, eagle, fox, goose,
grouse, heron, human child, roe deer, salmon

--1 3\'9\" -- 4\'9\" 47 -- 100 lbs adolescent human, ape, crane,
gazelle, lynx, sheep, stork, swan, wild goat, wolf

0 4\'9\" -- 6\'2\" 100 -- 215 lbs adult, antelope, boar, deer, dolphin,
pig

+1 6\'2\" -- 8\' 215 -- 465 lbs buck (male fallow deer), ibex, pony,
seal

+2 8\' -- 10\' 465 -- 1000 lbs bear, horse, lion, stag (male red deer)

+3 10\' -- 13\' 1000 -- 2150 lbs aurochs, moose, shark, walrus, war
horse

+4 13\' -- 17\' 2150 -- 4600 lbs elephant

+5 17\' -- 22\' 2 ½ -- 5 tons killer whale

+6 22\' -- 28\' 5 -- 10 ½ tons

+7 28\' -- 37\' 10 ½ -- 23 tons small dragon

+8 37\' -- 47\' 23 -- 50 tons

+9 47\' -- 61\' 50 -- 107 tons humpbacked whale

+10 61\' -- 79\' 107 -- 230 tons

**Age:** The creature\'s actual age, with the apparent age in brackets.
(See Long Term Events, page @@, for aging rules and apparent age.) This
is often irrelevant for creatures.

**Decrepitude:** The creature\'s number of Decrepitude points. These are
gained from aging, and described on page @@. This is often irrelevant
for creatures.

**Warping Score:** The creature\'s Warping Score, with the number of
excess Warping Points in brackets. See Warping, on page @@, for more
details. Creatures with Might do not have Warping Scores, as they are
already part of a realm, but mundane creatures can have one.

**Confidence Score:** The creature\'s Confidence Score, with the number
of Confidence Points in brackets. Important creatures, just like
important characters, have Confidence.

**Virtues and Flaws:** All the creature\'s Virtues and Flaws, if it has
any. Creatures commonly do not, as Virtues and Flaws are designed for
human characters. These are all described in Virtues and Flaws, starting
on page @@. If the creature has a Social Status, this comes first.
Otherwise, the list starts with the Major Virtues, in alphabetical
order, followed by Minor Virtues, alphabetically, Major Flaws,
alphabetically, and Minor Flaws, also arranged in alphabetical order. A
very few creatures do have The Gift, in which case it appears first, as
normal. Only creatures with Magic Might can have The Gift, as it is an
ability tied specifically to the Magic Realm.

**Personality Traits:** The creature\'s personality traits, and scores.

**Reputations:** Details of the creature\'s reputations, if any.

**Combat:** The combat statistics for modes of attack and weapons that
the creature uses often.

**Soak:** The creature\'s Soak score.

**Fatigue levels:** A listing of the creature\'s Fatigue levels and
penalties, which represent how tired the creature is. A notation of 0/0
indicates that the creature has two Fatigue levels that impose no
penalty, --1/--1/--1 indicates three Fatigue levels that impose a --1
penalty. The penalty from Fatigue is always the penalty imposed by the
least-tired remaining level, so a creature with three --1 Fatigue levels
has a Fatigue penalty of --1 from when it loses its last 0 Fatigue level
until it loses the third --1 Fatigue level. Fatigue is described on page
@@. Not all creatures can tire.

**Wound Penalties:** Shows the penalties for wounds of varying severity,
with the number of points of damage required to inflict a wound of that
severity shown in brackets. Not all creatures can be wounded.

**Abilities:** All of the creature\'s Abilities, in alphabetical order.
The format is Ability X (Y) (specialization), where X is the score in
the Ability and (Y) is the number of experience points spent towards the
next level.

**Equipment:** The creature\'s stuff.

**Encumbrance:** The creature\'s Encumbrance, with the creature\'s
Burden in brackets. The rules for Encumbrance are on page @@.

**Powers:** The creature\'s powers, in the format *Power Name,* X
points, Init Y, Form: Description.(See above.)

**Vis:** The type, amount, and location of any vis in the creature. This
is normally found in the corpse, rather than the living being.

Creating Creatures

When creating creatures for use in your own saga, you have a great deal
of freedom. The first thing to remember is that, if during play you
realize that you have assigned the wrong numbers to some of the
creature\'s statistics, you are allowed to change them during the game.
Thus, you do not need to worry about getting the numbers exactly right;
it\'s much more important to have the concept right, and have powers,
Abilities, and Characteristics that do the right sort of thing.

The first step is coming up with a concept. The magical spirit that is
the Rhine is very different from a faerie who mends shoes left out
overnight, and different again from a demon who tempts people to
blasphemy. An important part of the concept is the intended role with
respect to the player characters. If the player characters are supposed
to be able to defeat the creature in combat, you need to make sure its
statistics are low enough. On the other hand, if the player characters
are supposed to have no chance in a fight, you should make the
statistics high.

Powers should be defined on the basis of what you think is interesting.
If a power proves to be a problem, you can easily change it during play,
so, again, you shouldn\'t worry too much. Creature powers can break the
limits of magic, no matter what realm they are connected to, and you
don\'t even have to explain to the other players how a particular power
works. As long as you keep things interesting and fun, the players
aren\'t likely to be worried about details anyway.

There are a few things worth bearing in mind when picking the numbers.

**Might:** Might Score is very important. A Might Score of 20 indicates
that starting magi will have a lot of trouble affecting the creature
with magic. A Might Score of 40 is enough to cause problems for a
middle-aged magus, and a Might Score of 60 makes life difficult for even
powerful magi. A Might Score of 75 renders the creature almost immune to
Hermetic magic; casting totals over 75 are very rare indeed, even before
subtracting the spell level.

A Might Score high enough to stop the player magi using spells that kill
or inflict serious wounds is a good way to make sure that a climactic
battle lasts more than a round, especially if combined with a good Soak
score, or other strong combat abilities. A relatively high Might Score
is also a good way to motivate the magi to gather Arcane Connections,
horoscopes, and images, so that they can boost their Penetration as high
as possible.

**Combat Statistics:** If you do not intend the creature to get into a
fight, you don\'t need to work these out in advance. If it is intended
to fight, these need to be set by comparison with the player character
combat statistics. In general, the creature should be a bit weaker than
the force likely to attack it; if the grogs fight as a trained group,
this means that the creature should be a lot more powerful than an
individual grog.

**Powers:** The Might cost of a power is not determined primarily by how
powerful the power is. Instead, it determines how good the power\'s
Penetration is, and how often it can be used. As a rule, you will want
greater powers to have lower Penetration and be usable less often, but
that need not always be the case. A dragon that can breathe devastating
fire as often as it likes (Might cost 0), but can only heal once or
twice per day (Might cost 25), is a perfectly reasonable creature.

Mundane Beasts

The beasts of Mythic Europe are not quite the same as normal animals in
the real world. The ferocity of wild animals, in particular, is
exaggerated for dramatic purposes. In Mythic Europe, it is not uncommon
for beasts such as wolves to attack humans.

Beasts in Combat

Beasts fight much as humans do: they can use most combat options from
the Obstacles chapter, including disengaging, (untrained) group combat,
exertion, and non-lethal combat. Beasts are clever enough to use
exertion and other combat options to their best advantage. Only a few
beasts have the cooperative instincts to fight as a trained group. All
others must use the untrained group rules.

Beasts with the Ferocity Virtue have Confidence Points, which may be
spent in battle under certain circumstances.

Some beasts have more than one natural weapon. The best weapon is always
listed first. Secondary weapons are less effective, but might be useful
when the primary weapon is unavailable. For example, a bear usually
relies on its claws, but might attack with its teeth while climbing with
its claws after a victim. Regardless of how many weapons a beast has, it
may only attack with one weapon in a given round.

A Selection of Beasts

Adder (Viperis)

**Characteristics:** Cun --1, Per --2, Pre --6, Com --6, Str --8, Sta
+2, Dex +2, Qik +3

**Size:** --4

**Confidence Score:** 0

**Virtues and Flaws:** Lightning Reflexes, Infamous

**Qualities:** Ambush Predator, Loathsome Appearance, Slippery, Venomous

**Personality Traits:** Hostile +2

**Reputations:** Venomous (local) 4

**Combat:**

*Fangs:* Init +3, Attack +8, Defense +7\*, Damage --7; \* +6 to Defense
vs grapple attacks

**Soak:** +2**\
Fatigue Levels:** OK, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1), --3 (2), --5 (3), Incapacitated (4), Dead
(5+)

**Abilities:** Awareness 2 (prey), Brawl 2 (fangs), Hunt 4 (rodents),
Stealth 4 (stalking prey), Survival 3 (grassy areas)

**Powers:**

*Venomous Bite:* When the adder attacks, compare its Attack Advantage to
the victim's armor Protection (not his Soak). If the adder's advantage
is higher, the victim suffers the effects of adder venom as listed in
the Poison Table on p. @@, regardless of whether the bite inflicts an
actual wound. The storyguide may adjust the required Attack Advantage
for special circumstances: for instance, high boots might offer an
effective Protection +3 against the adder's special attack even though
they don't protect against normal attacks.

**Natural Weapons:** Fangs: Init 0, Atk +3, Def +1, Dam +1.

**Appearance:** The common adder is a small snake, usually about a foot
and a half in length. Its color varies from pale grey or yellow to red,
with diamond-shaped black markings along its back. Some individuals are
completely black. The adder\'s head is triangular in shape.

The adder is a venomous snake commonly found throughout Mythic Europe
(except in Ireland). It is hardy enough to hibernate through the winter.
It hunts rodents, lizards, and frogs by hiding and waiting for prey to
pass nearby. Its venom is weak and can sicken, but not usually kill, a
man.

The adder is prone to attack reflexively when anything stumbles across
its hiding-place (see the Lightning Reflexes Virtue). Because it\'s so
thin and flexible, it gains a +6 bonus to Defense against grapple
attacks.

Bear (Ursus)

**Characteristics:** Cun +1, Per 0, Pre 0, Com --5, Str +6, Sta +4, Dex
+2, Qik 0

**Size:** +2

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Ferocity (when injured), Improved Characteristics
(x2), Tough, Greedy (minor), Reclusive

**Qualities:** Aggressive, Extra Natural Weapons (claws), Fast Runner,
Grapple, Hardy, Imposing Appearance, Large Claws, Pursuit Predator,
Tough Hide

**Personality Traits:** Brave +3, Slothful +3, Aggressive +2

**Reputations:** Ferocious (local) 2

**Combat:**

*Claws:* Init 0, Attack +13, Defense +9, Damage +10

*Teeth:* Init 0, Attack +11, Defense +7, Damage +7

*Grapple:* Init 0, Attack +7, Defense +5, Damage n/a

**Soak:** +10

**Fatigue Levels:** OK, 0/0, --1/--1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--7), --3 (8--14), --5 (15--21),
Incapacitated (22--28), Dead (29+)

**Abilities:** Athletics 3 (sprinting), Awareness 3 (prey), Brawl 5
(claws), Hunt 4 (deer), Survival 5 (foraging), Swim 3 (against the
current)

**Natural Weapons:** Large Claws: Init 0, Atk +5, Def +3, Dam +4; Teeth:
Init 0, Atk +3, Def +1, Dam +1. The bear's tough hide and thick fur
combine to give it a Protection of +3.

**Appearance:** The bear is a large, shaggy beast that weighs up to
fifty stone (700 pounds) and stands over seven feet tall on its hind
legs. Its coat may be light brown or yellowish in color to black; most
often, it is medium brown. The bear has large claws and makes a
bellowing roar.

The only bear species that exists in Mythic Europe is known today as the
brown bear. It can be found throughout Mythic Europe in forests,
mountains, and even the northern tundra. Its range extends across North
Africa and through Asia as well. It is most common in wilderness areas
like the Pyrenees, the Alps, and Scandinavia and Russia.

The bear makes its lair in the earth, either in a cave or in a den it
digs with its mighty claws. It lives mainly by foraging but can hunt and
kill anything up to the size of a red deer. Men hunt the bear by setting
deadfalls or chasing it with hounds. Few dare to engage it at close
range with spears, for it is extremely powerful, and ferocious when
wounded.

The brown bear can run quickly, gaining a +3 bonus to rolls involving
running. It can stand on its hind legs so as to attack a man on
horseback. It can climb trees and is a strong swimmer.

According to Pliny the Elder, the he-bear sleeps for forty days in
winter and the she-bear sleeps for four months. The bear cub is born a
shapeless lump of flesh until the she-bear licks it into the shape of a
little bear.

Boar, Wild (Aper)

**Characteristics:** Cun 0, Per 0, Pre --4, Com --5, Str +2, Sta +2, Dex
0, Qik +1

**Size:** 0

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Berserk, Enduring Constitution, Ferocity (when
cornered), Tough, Greedy (minor), Wrathful (minor)

**Qualities:** Aggressive, Hardy, Herd Animal, Tireless, Tough Hide\
**Personality Traits:** Brave +4, Angry +3

**Reputations:** Ill-tempered (local) 2

**Combat:**

*Tusks:* Init +1, Attack +10, Defense +9, Damage +7

*Tusks (berserk):* Init +1, Attack +12, Defense +7, Damage +7

**Soak:** +7

**Fatigue Levels:** OK, 0/0, 0/0, --2/--2, --4, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20), Dead (21+)

**Abilities:** Athletics 4 (sprinting), Awareness 3 (foraging), Brawl 5
(tusks), Survival 5 (forests)

**Natural Weapons:** Tusks: Init 0, Atk +4, Def +2, Dam +5. The boar's
hide has a Protection of +2.

**Appearance:** The wild boar has prominent tusks and a hairy ridge
along its spine. It is densely covered in short bristles ranging in
color from grey to black or brown. Its legs are longer than those of a
domestic pig and it can run quickly for short distances.

The wild boar lives in forests throughout Mythic Europe, where it
forages by night and rests by day. Wild swine travel in groups called
sounders of twenty or more individuals, though they are also encountered
singly.

In France and England the boar is called *la* *bête noire*, \"the black
beast,\" for its evil temper. It is a favorite sport of noblemen, who
hunt it from horseback using hounds, lances, and swords. According to
Pliny the Elder, the wild boar toughens its hide by rubbing against
trees.

Boars vary greatly in size, from eight stone (112 pounds) to more than
thirty stone (420 pounds). The largest boars are Size +1.

Bull (Taurus)

**Characteristics:** Cun --2, Per 0, Pre --4, Com --4, Str +5, Sta +3,
Dex 0, Qik --1

**Size:** +2

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Affinity with Brawl, Ferocity (charging), Tough,
Oversensitive (to provocation)

**Qualities:** Aggressive, Domesticated, Tough Hide

**Personality Traits:** Aggressive +2

**Reputations:** Strong 4 (local)

**Combat:**

*Horns:* Init 0, Attack +8, Defense +3, Damage +7

**Soak:** +8\
**Fatigue Levels:** OK, 0/0, --1/--1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--7), --3 (8--14), --5 (15--21),
Incapacitated (22--28), Dead (29+)

**Abilities:** Athletics 4 (charging), Awareness 3 (predators), Brawl 5
(horns)

**Natural Weapons:** Large horns: Init +2, Atk +3, Def +2, Dam +3. The
bull's tough hide has a Protection of +2.

**Appearance:.** These statistics are for a bull of the Spanish type,
which is black in color, weighs about eighty stone (1120 pounds), and
has sharp, inward-curving horns and a hump on its back.

There are many breeds of cattle in Mythic Europe, some of them larger
than this specimen. Most breeds in Mythic Europe are short and
broad-bodied and have long horns. They may be black, white, tan, red, or
brown in color. Some breeds have a coat of shaggy fur. Pliny the Elder
writes of magical bulls that live in India, but the statistics here are
for a mundane bull.

The bull does not attack without reason, but it is easily --- sometimes
accidentally --- provoked. When a bull charges, it exerts itself to gain
an Attack bonus and may simultaneously spend Confidence.

In Spain, the Moorish nobles make a spectacle of fighting bulls from
horseback on festival days. The sport of bull-baiting, where spectators
watch a tethered bull being killed by a pack of dogs, is known
throughout Mythic Europe. Bulls are somewhat clumsy fighters at first,
but if they survive combat they quickly grow \"wise\" and become very
dangerous. The speed with which they learn to fight is reflected in
their Affinity with Brawl.

Cat (Felis)

**Characteristics:** Cun 0, Per +1, Pre --2, Com --4, Str --7, Sta 0,
Dex +3, Qik +4

**Size:** --3

**Confidence Score:** 0

**Virtues and Flaws:** Perfect Balance, Puissant Awareness, Sharp Ears,
Nocturnal

**Qualities:** Ambush Predator, Crafty, Good Jumper, Skilled Climber,
Thick Fur

**Personality Traits:** Curious +4, Timid +2

**Reputations:** Evil 2 (local) This reputation is strongest in Celtic
areas, and weaker or unknown in other places.

**Combat:**

*Claws:* Init +3, Attack +8, Defense +10, Damage --5

*Teeth:* Init +4, Attack +8, Defense +7, Dam- age --6

**Soak:** +1

**Fatigue Levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--2), --3 (3--4), --5 (5--6), Incapacitated
(7--8), Dead (9+)

**Abilities:** Athletics 3 (jumping), Awareness 4+2 (at night), Brawl 2
(claws), Hunt 4 (mice), Stealth 4 (stalking)

**Natural Weapons:** Claws: Init --1, Attack +2, Defense +3, Damage +2.
Teeth: Init 0, Attack +3, Defense +1, Damage +1. The cat's dense fur
gives it a Protection of +1.

**Appearance:** In Mythic Europe, domestic cats are short-haired and
tend to have grey or yellow-orange fur with darker stripes, though
black, white, and calico cats are not uncommon.

The European wildcat looks much like a large domestic cat with a
thicker, shaggier coat and bushy tail. Its coat is grey-brown with black
stripes and a white underbelly.

The cat has a reputation for evil among the common folk. They accuse it
of stealing the breath of babies, though only supernatural cats can do
such a thing. Cats are sometimes tolerated because they keep down the
population of rats, but they are not commonly kept as pets and they are
often killed by peasants out of superstition or cruelty. For some
reason, the cat\'s bad reputation is unknown in England and it is looked
upon more favorably in that land. Pliny the Elder says nothing about the
cat\'s reputation, noting only that the cat is the natural enemy of mice
and that its eyes are so keen it can see in the dark.

Cats generally flee from any opponent larger than themselves. They are
excellent climbers and jumpers, gaining a +3 bonus to appropriate rolls.

Falcon (Falco)

**Characteristics:** Cun --1, Per +3, Pre --1, Com --2, Str --6, Sta +2,
Dex +1, Qik +6

**Size:** --3

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Ferocity (swooping attack), Keen Vision, Fragile
Constitution

**Qualities:** Accomplished Flier, Fast Flier, Keen Eyesight, Pursuit
Predator, Extra Natural Weapons

**Personality Traits:** Fierce +3

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:**

*Talons:* Init +5, Attack +6, Defense +12, Damage --4

*Beak:* Init +6, Atk +6, Defense +9, Damage --5

**Soak:** -2

**Fatigue Levels:** OK, 0/0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--2), --3 (3--4), --5 (5--6), Incapacitated
(7--8), Dead (9+)

**Abilities:** Athletics 5 (swift flight), Awareness 4 (spotting prey),
Brawl 2 (talons), Hunt 4 (game birds), Survival 3 (cold climates)

**Natural Weapons:** The weapon statistics for a falcon's talons are
Init --1, Atk +2, Def +3, Dam +2. The statistics for its beak are Init
0, Atk +3, Def +1, Dam +1.

**Appearance:** These statistics are for a gyrfalcon, the largest and
most prized of falcons. Its wingspan can exceed four feet. It has a
short, hooked beak and dark eyes. Its plumage may be white, grey, or
dark

brown and has a banded pattern.

The falcon is among the swiftest of birds and hunts on the wing,
overtaking its prey in flight. Nobles use falcons to hunt game birds
such as partridge. In the wild, the gyrfalcon can kill prey as large as
a goose, and usually hunts birds and small rodents. It lives in cold
northern lands including Scandinavia, Iceland, and Russia.

Other, smaller species of falcon are Size --4. All falcons are fast
fliers and gain a +3 bonus to rolls involving speed.

Horse, Courser (Equus)

**Characteristics:** Cun --2, Per 0, Pre 0, Com --4, Str +4, Sta +3, Dex
--2, Qik +2

**Size:** +2

**Confidence Score:** 0

**Virtues and Flaws:** Fear (loud noises), Long- Winded, Improved
Characteristics, Non- combatant

**Qualities:** Domesticated, Fast Runner, Good Jumper, Herd Animal,
Imposing Appearance, Tireless

**Personality Traits:** Skittish +3, Brave --2

**Reputations:** None\
**Combat:**

*Hooves:* Init +4, Attack 0, Defense +4, Damage +5

**Soak:** +3

**Fatigue Levels:** OK, 0/0, --1/--1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--7), --3 (8--14), --5 (16--21),
Incapacitated (22--28), Dead (29+)

**Abilities:** Athletics 4 (long-distance running), Awareness 3 (noises)

**Natural Weapons:** The weapon statistics for a courser's kick are Init
+2, Atk +2, Def +2, Dam +1.

**Appearance:** The courser is a swift horse belonging to a mid-sized,
athletic breed like the Andalusian. The Andalusian stallion is tall and
strong, weighing about 80 stone (1120 pounds) and standing 15 hands (60
inches) high. It has a gracefully curving neck, a broad chest, straight
back, and a flowing mane and tail. Its coat may be grey, black,
chestnut, or roan.

The courser is a swift horse used by knights and nobles for hunting,
traveling, and carrying important messages. The courser is not trained
for battle and panics relatively easily; the statistics for its kick are
given in case a character is unlucky enough to be next to a
panic-stricken horse.

A light horse trained for battle is called a charger. To create a
charger, replace the courser\'s Noncombatant Flaw with Proud (minor),
change the Brave Personality Trait to zero, and give the animal a Brawl
skill of 2 (hooves). Another kind of light horse is the palfrey, which
is a riding horse chosen for its gentle gait and often ridden by
inexperienced riders or by ladies. To convert a courser to a palfrey,
reduce Quickness by two points and increase Dexterity by the same
amount. Palfreys have the Noncombatant Flaw.

Any light horse --- courser, charger, or palfrey --- gets a +3 to rolls
involving running or jumping.

Horse, Destrier (Equus)

**Characteristics:** Cun --2, Per 0, Pre 0, Com --4, Str +6, Sta +3, Dex
+1, Qik --1

**Size:** +3

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Ferocity (when ridden in battle), Improved
Characteristics, Long-Winded, Proud (minor)\
**Qualities:** Domesticated, Fast Runner, Herd Animal, Imposing
Appearance, Tireless

**Personality Traits:** Loyal +2, Brave +1

**Reputations:** Aggressive (local) 1

**Combat:**

*Hooves:* Init +1, Attack +7, Defense +5, Damage +7

**Soak:** +3

**Fatigue Levels:** OK, 0/0, --1/--1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--8), --3 (9--16), --5 (17--24),
Incapacitated (25--32), Dead (33+)

**Abilities:** Athletics 5 (balancing), Brawl 3 (hooves)

**Natural Weapons:** The weapon statistics for a destrier's kick are
Init +2, Atk +2, Def

+2, Dam +1.\
**Appearance:** The destrier is a heavy warhorse. One breed used as
destriers is the Percheron, a huge horse weighing over 140 stone (1960
pounds) and standing over 16 hands (64 inches) high at the withers. It
has a heavy, slightly curved neck, a broad and deep chest, and powerful,
stocky legs. Its coat is either grey or black in color.

The destrier, or heavy war horse, has been bred in Mythic Europe since
at least the time of Charles Martel (8th century A.D.). Some of the
large horse breeds in Mythic Europe are the Percheron, the Belgian, and
the Friesian. These horses are used mainly for battle; farm work is done
using oxen.

The destrier is almost always a stallion. It is highly trained so it
will charge without fear when its rider commands. When pressed into
melee, it can rear on its hind legs and lash out with its forehooves.
Though huge, the destrier is agile and can balance on its hind legs for
several combat rounds without difficulty. It is trained to fight
independently of its rider, so it can help defend him if he should be
dismounted or badly wounded.

Like all horses, the destrier is a fast runner and gains a +3 bonus to
rolls involving speed. It is too heavy to be much of a jumper.

Hound (Canis)

**Characteristics:** Cun 0, Per +2, Pre --4, Com 0, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex
+1, Qik +2

**Size:** 0

**Confidence Score:** 0

**Virtues and Flaws:** Improved Characteristics, Long-Winded, Sharp
Ears, Reckless

**Qualities:** Domesticated, Keen Sense of Smell, Pack Animal, Pursuit
Predator, Vocal

**Personality Traits:** Loyal +3, Reckless +3, Brave +2

**Reputations:** Loyal 2 (local)

**Combat:**

*Bite:* Init +2, Attack +8, Defense +7, Damage +1

**Soak:** +2

**Fatigue Levels:** OK, 0/0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11-- 15),
Incapacitated (16--20), Dead (21+)

**Abilities:** Athletics 3 (distance running), Awareness 3 (keeping
watch), Brawl 3 (bite), Hunt 4 (track by scent)\
**Natural Weapons:** The weapon statistics for a dog's bite are Init 0,
Atk +3, Def +1, Dam +1.

**Appearance:** These statistics are for a large hound such as the
bloodhound. The bloodhound stands a little over two feet at the shoulder
and weighs up to nine stone (126 pounds). It has large jowls, dangling
ears, and a heavy tail. Its coat is short and may be tan, red, or liver
in color.

There are many breeds of dogs in Mythic Europe, many of them similar to
breeds that exist in our world (though they may be called by different
names). The largest dogs are used for guarding livestock or hunting
dangerous beasts like wolves, bears, and wild boars. They include the
breeds like the bloodhound, elkhound, Rottweiler, mastiff, and great
Dane. Smaller hounds, such as the greyhound, Basset hound, and
Dalmatian, are Size --1 and are often used to hunt deer, fox, and small
game. Medium-sized dogs (Size --2) include spaniels, used to chase small
game and to flush game birds for falconers; terriers, which hunt
badgers, stoats, and rats; and the Welsh corgi, a small cattle-herding
dog. The smallest dogs (Size --3) include lap-dogs, small terriers bred
for vermin control, and the tiny Italian greyhound. Several breeds that
are popular in the real world, such as the German shepherd and most
retrievers, did not exist in the Middle Ages. These statistics are for
the bloodhound, and the Characteristics of other breeds may be
different.

All dogs have a good sense of smell, and the bloodhound\'s sense is so
keen it gets a +3 bonus to all related rolls. Dogs also get a +3 to
endurance-related rolls due to their Long-Winded Virtue.

A pack of dogs may fight as a trained group under the leadership of a
human Master of the Pack. Use the Master\'s Animal Handling score
instead of his Leadership score to determine how many dogs he can
command at a time.

Lion (Leo)

**Characteristics:** Cun +2, Per 0, Pre 0, Com 0, Str +6, Sta +3, Dex
+2, Qik +1

**Size:** +2

**Confidence Score:** 2 (6)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Ferocity (self-defense), Improved Characteristics
(x2), Puissant Brawl, Self-Confident, Tough, Proud, Weakness
(submission)

**Qualities:** Aggressive, Ambush Predator, Crafty, Good Jumper, Hardy,
Imposing Appearance, Large Claws, Large Teeth, Tough Hide, Vocal

**Personality Traits:** Brave +5, Fierce +5

**Reputations:** Fierce (local) 4

**Combat:**

*Claws*: Init +1, Attack +15, Defense +12, Damage +10

*Bite:* Init +1, Attack +13, Defense +9, Damage +9

**Soak:** +8

**Fatigue Levels:** OK, 0/0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--7), --3 (8--14), --5 (15--21),
Incapacitated (22--28), Dead (29+)

**Abilities:** Athletics 5 (pouncing), Awareness 2 (smell), Brawl 5+2
(claws), Hunt 4 (deer), Stealth 4 (stalking), Survival 5 (arid climates)

**Natural Weapons:** Large claws: Init 0, Attack +5, Defense +3, Damage
+4; Large teeth: Init 0, Attack +4, Defense +1, Damage +3. Its hide
gives it a Protection of +2.

**Appearance:** The lion is a legendary beast more often depicted in
artwork than encountered in the flesh. It can weigh up to 35 stone (490
pounds) and have a body length of over ten feet. It has a short, broad
muzzle with powerful jaws and teeth. Its coat is tawny and the male lion
has a dark, shaggy mane. The fearsome roar of the lion can be heard from
a great distance.

Pliny the Elder writes that, during his time, lions were found in Europe
only between the rivers Achelous and Mestus (in Greece), and that they
also inhabited Syria and North Africa. The European lion was extinct
before the middle ages in historical Europe, but might have survived in
Mythic Europe. Pliny writes that there are two kinds of lions: those
with long manes, which are bold; and those with curly manes, which are
timid. These statistics are for the bold variety. Pliny also notes that
the lion will not attack a man who lies prostrate before it.

The lion can make impressive leaps and gets +3 to jump-related rolls. It
can easily leap high enough to attack a man on horseback.

Stag (Cervus)

**Characteristics:** Cun --2, Per +2, Pre 0, Com --5, Str +2, Sta +2,
Dex 0, Qik +2

**Size:** +2

**Confidence Score:** 0

**Virtues and Flaws:** Improved Characteristics, Higher Purpose (protect
the herd)

**Qualities:** Defensive Fighter, Extra Natural Weapons, Large Antlers,
Fast Runner, Good Jumper, Sharp Ears

**Personality Traits:** Brave +1

**Reputations:** Noble (local) 2

**Combat:**

*Antlers:* Init +4, Attack +7, Defense +8, Damage +5

*Hooves:* Init +4, Attack +6, Defense +8, Damage +3

*Dodge:* Init +2, Attack n/a, Defense +7, Damage n/a

**Soak:** +2

**Fatigue Levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--7), --3 (8--14), --5 (15--21),
Incapacitated (22--28), Dead (29+)

**Abilities:** Athletics 4 (sprinting), Awareness 3 (predators), Brawl 4
(dodge), Survival 3 (woodlands)

**Natural Weapons**: During the autumn and winter, a stag has antlers
with the following weapon statistics: Init +2, Atk +3, Def +2, Dam +3.
In spring, it sheds its antlers and must fight with its hooves until the
following autumn: Init +2, Atk +2, Def +2, Dam +1.

**Appearance:** These statistics are for the red deer, one of the
largest deer in Mythic Europe. Adult males average 40 to 50 stone in
weight (560 to 700 pounds) depending on the richness of the available
food supply, and may be up to 15 hands high---as tall as some horses,
but more lightly built. The red deer's coat is reddish-brown in winter
and tan in summer, with a lighter rump and underbelly. Stags have a
shaggy mane of dark fur and an impressive rack of antlers over four feet
across from tip to tip. They make a deep, bellowing roar during the
autumn mating season.

The red deer lives in open woodlands, moors, and grasslands throughout
Mythic Europe. It avoids dense, tangled forests but can be found in
alpine forests and meadows. The species is called \"elk\" in
contemporary North America. The size of the red deer varies from +1
where grazing is poor to +2 where the grass is rich and plentiful. Does
are smaller than stags and lack antlers.

The red deer is a favorite quarry of hunters. In some places, only
nobles are allowed to hunt it. The stag usually flees from combat,
trying to draw enemies away from its herd, but it can fight if it must.
All deer gain a +3 bonus to rolls involving running or jumping.

Wolf (Lupus)

**Characteristics:** Cun +2, Per 0, Pre --2, Com 0, Str --1, Sta +3, Dex
+2, Qik +2

**Size:** --1

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Improved Characteristics (x2), Ferocity (when
hungry), Long-Winded, Sharp Ears, Compulsion (killing), Infamous

**Qualities:** Aggressive, Hardy, Keen Sense of Smell, Pack Animal/Pack
Leader, Pursuit Predator, Sharp Ears, Thick Fur, Vocal

**Personality Traits:** Brave +3, Cowardly +3

**Reputations:** Bloodthirsty (local) 4

**Combat:**

*Teeth:* Init +2, Attack +11, Defense +9, Damage 0

**Soak:** +4\
**Fatigue Levels:** OK, 0/0, --1/--1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--4), --3 (5--8), --5 (9--12), Incapacitated
(13--16), Dead (17+)\
**Abilities:** Athletics 5 (distance running), Awareness 3 (smell),
Brawl 5 (teeth), Hunt 4 (track by smell), Survival 3 (winter)

**Natural Weapons:** Teeth: Init 0, Atk +3, Def +1, Dam +1. Its thick
fur gives it a Protection of +1.

**Appearance:** The wolf has erect, triangular ears, a narrow muzzle,
and a coat of shaggy fur. Its eyes are usually yellowish and have a
steady, unsettling gaze. Its color may be any shade from pale grey
through dark brown, often with lighter patches on the sides of the face
and around the eyes. The wolf can bark, but its better-known sound is
its eerie, piercing howl.

The wolf is found throughout Mythic Europe, the Middle East, and North
Africa. According to Pliny the Elder, the wolves of northern regions are
fierce while those of Africa and Egypt are weak

Wolves are greatly feared by commoners. They are hunted with large
hounds because they kill livestock. In some lands, there is a bounty on
their hides. Many tales attribute supernatural powers to wolves, but
most wolves are mundane and have no powers at all.

The Flaws above reflect the medieval perception of the wolf as a wanton,
bloodthirsty killer. Individual wolves, such as the Animal Companion of
a player character, may substitute another Personality Flaw in place of
the Compulsion. A wolf Animal Companion that goes around killing
livestock could be disruptive to stories. Regardless of such a wolf\'s
actual personality, mundanes are likely to treat it with a great deal of
fear and suspicion.

The leader of a wolf pack has the additional Ability, Leadership 5
(wolves). A pack may fight as a trained group when its leader is
present. A wolf pack is extremely dangerous.

Creating Mundane Beasts

Shapeshifters of varying sorts create the need for a wide variety of
statistics for mundane beasts. Although the animals listed in the
previous section cover a wide range of the most popular options, there
is no way to cover all the creatures that a magus might want to change
into. This section provides detailed guidelines for creating any mundane
beast, from the hedgehog heartbeast of Herissent of House Bjornaer to a
camel from the deserts of Arabia.

1\. Type and Size

There are four categories of beasts: Birds, Fish, Hoofed Beasts and
Clawed Beasts. Birds are self-explanatory. Fish includes amphibians such
as frogs, toads, and salamanders and reptiles such as snakes and
lizards, as well as more traditional fish and whales. Hoofed Beasts
includes both domestic animals and wild ones. The category of Clawed
Beasts contains all creatures which do not fit into the other types.

2\. Characteristics

As noted earlier, mundane beasts have a Characteristic called Cunning in
place of an Intelligence score. Use Cunning for rolls that would
otherwise call for Intelligence, such as finding a way out of a closed
barn. Beasts have a limited capacity for problem-solving but they lack
imagination, reason, and intelligence as such. Communication and
Presence have slightly different meanings for animals. Presence
represents how much impact that the creature has on its human viewers.
Creatures with a low Presence are barely noticed, those with a high
Presence instill awe, fear or wonder. Communication, as for humans,
represents the ability of the animal to impart information; few animals
(to the medieval mind) are capable of the transmission of complex
thoughts to others. For beasts, the Quickness Characteristic has mainly
to do with reflexes and agility, and little to do with movement rate.
Many animals can run faster than a human, but that does not necessarily
mean they should have better Initiative and Defense scores. Animals that
run fast, but do not have especially good reflexes, have a Quality (see
below) which reflects this.

Unlike human characters, animals only spend points on their four
physical characteristics (Stamina, Strength, Dexterity and Quickness).
Like human characters, there are up to seven points to spend on
increasing these characteristics. Negative points may also be taken to
gain an equal number of positive points; but an animal cannot have more
than two characteristics with negative values, and the minimum value is
equal to (Size -- 5). There is no maximum characteristic score for an
animal, and no Virtue or Flaw is needed for extreme characteristic
scores for animals.

After spending points on characteristics, make the following
adjustments:

Add twice the Size to Strength

Subtract Size from Quickness

These adjustments may give an animal a third negative characteristic, or
reduce a characteristic below the minimum of (Size -- 5).

The other four characteristics (Cunning, Perception, Presence and
Communication) are given values according to the type of creature.

A creature may have the Minor Virtue Increased Characteristics one or
more times (this is particularly appropriate for predators), just like a
human character. The characteristic points gained from this Virtue may
be applied to any of the physical Characteristics. These points should
be spent *before* applying the adjustments for Size. See Step 3, below,
for adjustments to this Virtue.

Mental Characteristics of Creatures

Type Cun Per Pre Com

Clawed Beast 0 0 --2 --5

Hoofed Beast --2 0 --4 --5

Bird --1 +2 --1 --2

Fish --3 --2 --5 --6

Example Physical Characteristics of Creatures

Type of creature Size Str Sta Dex Qik Example

Small predator --5 --7 0 +1 +5 Polecat

Large predator --1 0 +3 --1 +1 Lynx

Rodent --7 --12 +1 +3 +5 Rat

Small herbivore --3 --7 +3 +2 +2 Hare

Large herbivore 0 +2 +2 0 +1 Boar

Songbird --6 --12 0 +3 +7 Thrush

Predatory bird --3 --6 0 +1 +6 Falcon

Reptile --4 --8 +2 +2 +3 Adder

Large fish --2 --4 +4 0 0 Salmon

Creatures of Non-Standard Size

You may wish to create creatures which are larger or smaller than the
average for their type, or they may have been affected by Muto Animal
spells. This is a simple procedure: for every point of Size removed,
subtract two from Strength (and therefore Damage total), add one to
Quickness (and therefore Initiative and Defense totals), and decrease
the damage range for each wound level by 1 (minimum of 1). Note that the
creature\'s mass has halved, at least. Increasing Size has exactly the
opposite effect.

3\. Virtues and Flaws

Each species of beast has certain Virtues and Flaws that are common to
all members of that species. Species Virtue and Flaws are not given for
game balance reasons, but rather to provide rules for the unique
strengths and qualities of beasts. When designing your own species,
simply assign the Virtues and Flaws that describe the species the way
you imagine it. It is recommended that a species have at least one point
of Flaws for every three points of Virtues. All beasts get their
species\' Virtues and Flaws for free.

Exceptional beasts may also take individual Virtues or Flaws that set
them apart from others of their kind. Any individual Virtues a beast
takes must be balanced with individual Flaws, just as for human
characters.

Personality Flaws are particularly appropriate for beasts; you may need
to come up with new Flaws of this type, and creatures can have more than
one.

**Suitable Virtues and Flaws**

Virtues: Berserk, Enduring Constitution, Ferocity, Improved
Characteristics\*, Lightning Reflexes, Long-Winded, Perfect Balance,
Rapid Convalescence, Piercing Gaze, Reserves of Strength,
Self-Confident, Tough

Flaws: Clumsy, Fragile Constitution, Poor Eyesight, Poor Hearing, Fear,
Noncombatant, Nocturnal, Reckless, Reclusive, Weakness; most Major
Personality Flaws taken as Minor Flaws.

\*Improved Characteristics: large creatures require more characteristic
points, because high value characteristics are increasingly more
expensive. A creature of Size +1 or smaller gets 3 characteristic points
from this Virtue as normal, a creature of Size +2 gets 6 characteristic
points, a creature of size +3 gets 9 characteristic points, and so on.

4\. Basic Abilities

All creatures have the following Abilities:

Type Abilities

Clawed Beast Brawl 3 (bite or claw), Survival 3 (home terrain),
Awareness 3 (food), Athletics 3 (running)

Hoofed Beast Brawl 2 (dodging), Survival 3 (home terrain), Awareness 3
(predators), Athletics 4 (running)

Bird Brawl 2 (dodging), Survival 3 (home terrain), Awareness 4 (food),
Athletics 3 (flying)

Fish Brawl 2 (dodging), Survival 3 (home terrain), Awareness 2 (food),
Swim 5 (in home terrain)

Qualities (see below) may add further Abilities to this list. Animals
(at least, those with Cunning rather than Intelligence) cannot acquire
experience points to improve their Abilities once they have reached
adulthood, nor can they learn new Abilities. However, an intelligent
being can provide a tamed beast with Teaching experience points using
Animal Handling instead of Teaching; these points can be applied to
current Abilities or conceivable new Abilities.

Unless modified by Qualities, all creatures have one Natural Weapon
(usually either Teeth, Claws, or Hooves); and fur, feathers or scales
which give them a Protection of 0.

A young animal may not have all of the Qualities that it will as an
adult, and has reduced scores in most Abilities.

5\. Qualities

Qualities are features of the animal that affect its game
characteristics. Add any appropriate Qualities to the base creature from
the following list, or make up your own. If any Quality grants an
Ability that the creature already has, use the highest score, and choose
whichever specialty seems most appropriate. Through Qualities, a
creature may have one or more extra Fatigue levels. One extra Fatigue
level grants an additional Winded level, two extra grant another Winded
Level and another Weary Level, etc.

Accomplished Flyer: this bird is either a particularly powerful flier,
or an acrobatic one. Athletics 5 (flying); the creature must be capable
of flight.

Aggressive: add 1 to Cunning, Brawl 5 (natural weapons)

Ambush Predator: the beast lies in wait for its prey, and catches it by
surprise. Stealth 4 (stalking prey), Hunt 4 (prey). Specialization for
Brawl changes to one of the beast\'s natural weapons. If it has
successfully crept up on its prey, it automatically wins Initiative in
the first round of combat, and gains a +3 to its Attack total for the
first round only.

Amphibious: Swim 4 (home terrain). Can hold breath for twice as long as
normal.

Aquatic: Swim 5 (home terrain). Can breathe water.

Camouflage: +3 to all rolls to hide, whenever the creature is not
moving.

Constriction: the creature has a long sinuous body or muscular tail, and
can constrict an opponent whose Size is less than its own. Constriction
is based on the grappling rules (page @@). The Attack Total is computed
using the Brawl skill, and a constriction attack has the following
weapon statistics: Init 0, Atk +3, Dfn 0, Dam n/a. As long as the
creature maintains the grapple, its opponent is considered deprived of
air (see page @@). The victim must make a Stamina check every 30 seconds
(that is, every five rounds), or suffer the normal effects of
deprivation. Once the creature has successfully grappled an opponent
(and begun constricting), on subsequent rounds it can continue
constricting and still attack with other weapons. These attacks may be
directed at the grappled victim, or at another opponent.

Crafty: raise Cunning to 0 (if currently negative), or add 1. This
Quality may be taken more than once for exceptionally cunning animals.

Crushing Jaws: although the creature is not particularly strong compared
to humans, the muscles with which it bites down are tremendously
powerful. The muscles which open its mouth are comparatively weak. A
human may hold closed the creature's jaws with a successful Grapple.
This Quality adds +3 Damage to any bite attack.

Defensive Fighter: the creature will fight, but only to defend itself.
Brawl (dodging) 4, and an extra Fatigue Level

Domesticated: the beast loses any Survival Ability that it might have,
but gains 1 point of Communication, if currently negative.

Extra Natural Weapons: gain an extra set of Natural Weapons, such as
Horns/Antlers, Teeth/Tusks, Claws, or Hooves. Only one set of weapons
may be used in each round of combat. This quality may be taken more than
once.

Eyes of the Bat: the creature sees in much the same way as magi using
the spell *Eyes of the Bat.*

Fast Runner: +3 to all rolls involving running.

Fast Flyer: +3 to all rolls involving speed while flying; the creature
must be capable of flight.

Fins: no penalties to actions taken underwater.

Good Jumper: +3 to all rolls involving jumping.

Grapple: the creature may make a grapple attack instead of a normal
attack. This attack may only be employed against an opponent which is
less than or equal to (creature\'s Size + 1). See Non Lethal Combat
(page @@) for rules on grappling. If the creature has another natural
weapon (such as a bite), it may add its current Grapple Strength to its
Attack Total in subsequent rounds, until the opponent breaks free. The
creature must defend against any opponent outside the grapple with its
Grapple Defense (see Natural Weapons Table, below).

Hardy: the creature is used to harsh conditions; it has Survival 5 (home
terrain) and an extra Fatigue Level.

Herd Animal: the creature is brave when with others of its own kind.
When forced to fight as a group, herd animals temporarily gain the
Ferocity Virtue, which they may use to stampede or escape what is
threatening them as a group. These animals do not have the Ferocity
Virtue when caught on their own, unless taken as a Virtue. For example,
a stag might have the Virtue, whereas the deer in his herd have this
Quality.

Imposing Appearance: the creature has a beautiful, majestic or
awe-inspiring appearance which appeals even to humans. Raise Presence to
0 (if negative), or increase by 1 otherwise. This Quality may be taken
more than once for exceptionally beautiful or impressive creatures.

Keen Eyesight: add 1 to Perception, +3 to all rolls involving eyesight

Keen Sense of Smell: add 1 to Perception, +3 to all rolls using the
sense of smell, +2 to all Hunt rolls.

Large Claws: the creature\'s claws are larger than average for a
creature of its size. Use the weapon statistics for Large Claws listed
below.

Large Horns/Antlers: the creature\'s horns or antlers are larger than
average for a creature of its size. Use the weapon statistics for Large
Horns listed below.

Large Teeth: the creature\'s teeth are larger than average for a
creature of its size. Use the weapon statistics for Large Teeth listed
below.

Loathsome Appearance: the creature is so repulsive that its Presence
drops to --6. However, this should be treated as a Presence of +3 if the
animal makes any attempt to scare or intimidate an opponent.

Mimicry: the creature is capable of mimicking other noises, such as a
human voice. Raise Communication to 0 (if negative) or increase by 1. It
does not understand the meaning of the sounds it makes, unless the
creature has Intelligence rather than Cunning, in which case the
creature acquires Living Language 3. Note that a magus shapechanged into
a creature with this quality cannot form the precise and complex sounds
required for spell casting.

Overrun: this effect only applies if the creature has charged into
combat, exerting itself for this attack. If the attack is successful,
the opponent must make a Dexterity + Athletics stress roll against an
Ease Factor equal to (Damage Total (before soak) + creature's Size --
opponent's Size). If the roll fails, the opponent lands on the ground a
number of feet away equal to the creature's Size, taking falling damage
in the process. He must spend his next action regaining his feet,
although the creature normally follows up with a trample. Prone
characters cannot parry, but must use Brawl to defend themselves.

Pack Animal: these creatures may fight as a Trained Group when a Pack
Leader is present. If the Pack Leader is not present, they may still
fight as an Untrained Group.

Pack / Herd Leader: add 1 to Communication, Leadership 5 (own species).

Pursuit Predator: the beast actively hunts for its prey, either tracking
it by scent or by chasing it down. Hunt 4 (prey), and an extra Fatigue
Level. Specialization for Brawl changes to one of the beast\'s natural
weapons.

Roll Attack: when the creature has successfully bitten a foe, it may
roll in the following round. When the creature rolls, it either twists
away a chunk of the flesh of its victim (doing +6 damage) or, if
possible, drags its victim beneath the surface of the water. To prevent
injury or submersion from a roll, the victim must treat this as a
successful grappling attack with an Attack Advantage of 10. If a
character is being drowned by the creature, the character may attempt to
break free of the creatures jaws each round. This requires the character
to overcome a successful Grapple attack with an Attack Advantage of 10.

Sharp Ears: add 1 to Perception, +3 to rolls involving hearing

Shell: the creature is encased in a protective shell. Grants a +4 to
Protection, but the creature suffers a --3 to all rolls involving fast
or nimble movement.

Skilled Climber: +3 to all rolls involving climbing.

Slippery: this creature has a +6 to Defense rolls against Grapple
attacks. This Quality may be taken more than once; and the bonus rises
by +3 each additional time it is taken.

Smell Water: the creature can smell drinkable water for a distance of up
to two miles.

Spiny: the creature is covered in spines; these grant a +1 bonus to
Protection. If any opponent strikes at the Spiny creature with a bite,
claw or fist attack, he inflicts damage as normal, but suffers +5 damage
in return. Some creatures may poison their spines (see Venomous, below);
in which case the attacker\'s own Attack Advantage is used against
itself to determine the success of the Venom attack only.

Survive Without Water: the creature can survive without water for up to
two weeks.

Swallow Whole: the creature can swallow whole any creature of Size 4 or
more smaller than the creature itself. The victim can struggle to
escape, but the confining nature of the gullet permits only Brawl
attacks. It is impossible to breathe inside the creature, requiring
deprivation rolls (page @@) even if the victim escapes the grapple.
Three rounds after being swallowed, the victim reaches the stomach. The
powerful acids inflict +9 damage every round, complete immersion
quadruples this to +36 (page @@). A character may be able to brace
himself and avoid complete immersion: make a Strength + Athletics roll
each round: Ease Factor 6 results in only half immersion (triple
damage), Ease Factor 9 results in immersion of a limb (double damage),
and Ease Factor 12 means just a splash (normal damage). The creature
cannot swallow a second creature until the previous one has reached the
stomach.

Timid: subtract 1 from Presence, Stealth 4 (hiding), Awareness 4
(predators); usually lacks Natural Weapons.

Tireless: the creature gains two extra fatigue levels.

Thick Fur / Thick Scales: +1 to Protection; this Quality stacks with the
Tough Virtue and the Tough Hide Quality.

Tough Hide: +2 to Protection; this Quality stacks with the Tough Virtue
and the Thick Fur Quality.

Venomous: one of the cerature's attacks (usually the bite) also delivers
venom into the wound. Compare the Attack Advantage to the victim's
Protection (not Soak). If the creature's advantage is higher, then the
victim suffers the effect of the venom, regardless of whether the bite
inflicts an actual wound. The venom can be of one of two strengths
(chosen when Quality is taken) --- the creature can choose from either:
a venom that inflicts a Light Wound if a Stamina roll with an Ease
Factor of 12 is failed; or one that inflicts a Medium Wound but has an
Ease Factor of 9 to avoid the effects. This Quality may be taken more
than once: each additional time increases the severity of the wound
inflicted or adds three to the Ease Factor to avoid the effects.

Vocal: the creature can produce impressive vocalizations, such as a
powerful roar or howl, beautiful birdsong or the like. Communication is
raised to 0 (if negative) or increased by 1, gain Music 3. This Quality
may be taken twice for particularly impressive vocal ability, increasing
Music to 5.

5\. Combat Statistics

Combat Statistics are calculated as normal (page @@), using the Natural
Weapons Table. Because combat totals are affected by Characteristics,
these weapons may be used for creatures of all sizes; a mouse and a cat
have the same basic statistics for their bite attack, but the combat
totals are very different.

Natural Weapons Table

Init Atk Dfn Dam

Grapple 0 0 0 n/a

Dodge 0 n/a 0 n/a

Teeth 0 +3 +1 +1

Large Teeth +0 +4 +1 +3

Tusks +0 +4 +2 +5

Claw --1 +2 +3 +2

Large Claws 0 +5 +3 +4

Horns +1 +3 --1 +2

Large Horns/Antlers +2 +3 +2 +3

Hooves +2 +2 +2 +1

All natural weapons use the Brawl Ability. Strength, Load and Cost are
not applicable.

6\. Putting it all together

Your creature is now finished!

Aging

If an animal is to be an important part of a saga (as an Animal
Companion, for example), its response to aging should be considered.
There are three things to be considered: the age at which aging begins,
the adjustment to the aging roll due to age, and the number of aging
rolls per year. A human, with an average lifespan of 50 years (ignoring
lifestyle modifiers), begins aging at 35, adds one to the aging roll for
every 10 years, and makes 1 aging roll each year. The storyguide should
decide upon the average lifespan of the creature and adjust these
figures accordingly. Thus a creature with an average lifespan of 10
years has a modifier of (50/10) or five. It therefore begins aging at
(35/5) or 7 years old, adds one to the aging roll for every (10/5), or
two, years of age, and makes (1 x 5), or five, aging rolls each year. If
more than one aging roll is made each year, they should be spread evenly
throughout the four seasons, with any excess occurring in Winter.

When deciding upon the average lifespan of a creature, strict biological
adherence is not necessary in Mythic Europe. Most small animals will
have an average lifespan of under ten.

Statistics of Shapechangers

The rules for creating mundane animals describe the process for
producing the statistics for an average member of a particular species,
but most player characters are not average humans, and so tend to have
characteristics in animal form that differ from the species average. For
Bjornaer magi and other shapeshifters, determine the statistics for the
creature as described earlier, then follow these steps:

**1. Characteristics**

For all Characteristics other than Intelligence/Cunning:

-   If the human and the animal Characteristic are both negative, use
    the lower of the two.

-   If the human and the animal Characteristic are both positive, use
    the higher of the two.

Otherwise, add the two Characteristics together.

**2. Cunning vs. Intelligence**

In most cases, the shapechanger retains human Intelligence. However,
lycanthropes lose Intelligence, replaced by Cunning, and other
transformations, particularly curses, may have the same effect.

*Example of Characteristics, Cunning, and Intelligence:*

*Ulf (magus): Int +2, Per --1, Pre +2, Com 0, Str --1, Sta +1, Dex +1,
Qik +1*

*Wolf: Cun +1, Per +2, Pre 0, Com +1, Str --1, Sta +3, Dex +2, Qik +1*

*Ulf in Heartbeast form:\
Int +2 (human value)\
Per +1 (sum of human --1 and wolf +2)\
Pre +2 (sum of human +2 and wolf 0)\
Com +1 (sum of human 0 and wolf +1)\
Str --1 (lowest of human --1 and wolf --1) Sta +3 (highest of human +1
and wolf +3) Dex +2 (highest of human +1 and wolf +2) Qik +1 (highest of
human +1 and wolf +1)*

**3. Size**

Human Size has no impact on the Size statistic of the shapechanged form.
However, if the animal form is within the size range of most animals
(Size --4 to Size 0) and the character has a Virtue or Flaw that affects
Size, then she will be a notably large or small member of her species.

**4. Virtues & Flaws**

Apply all the Virtues and Flaws of the animal form while shapechanged,
as well as all Virtues and Flaws of the human form, if applicable. For
example, a Lame character is still Lame as an animal. If the animal form
already has a Virtue or Flaw possessed by the character, it applies only
once.

**5. General Abilities**

Use the General Abilities of the animal form. The General Abilities of
the animal form are not suitable for human bodies, and cannot be taught
to human characters. None of the human General Abilities can be accessed
other than languages (which can still be understood) and lores. Arcane
and Academic Abilities are available to the shapechanger if he retains
Intelligence. Supernatural Abilities can always be used.

**6. Communicating**

Acquire the ability to communicate with members of the same or similar
species as the shapechanged form. Animals of the same temperament and
aspect, which also share the same diet and habitat, can be considered to
speak dialects of the same language. Thus, it can be assumed that all
eagles, hawks, and buzzards share a common language, but this differs
from the shared language of the swans, storks, and herons, and also from
the language spoken by songbirds.

**7. Wounds & Experience**

Any wounds taken in the human form are reflected in the animal form, and
vice versa. Thus, a human with a Medium Wound has a Medium Wound in cat
form, despite the fact that if that wound had been inflicted when in cat
form, it would have been more serious due to the different wound ranges
of a cat and a human. Lycanthropes are an exception to this --- when
transforming back into human form, all wounds taken while an animal are
healed, although wounds suffered as a human remain.

A character who spends a substantial amount of time in animal form may
apply any experience gained for that period (either through adventuring,
exposure, or practice) to the Abilities of her animal form.

Creatures of Magic

Baghl, an Earth Jinni

**Magic Might:** 15 (Terram)

**Characteristics:** Int --2, Per +2, Pre +1, Com --1, Str +3, Sta +3,
Dex +1, Qik --1

**Size:** +2

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3 points)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Jinn; Greater Immunity: Fire, Ways of the
Mountains; Second Sight, Skinchanger, Strong-Willed, Tough; Greater
Malediction (honor bargains made), Magical Air, Vulnerable Magic
(mua\'addhin\'s call); Reclusive.

**Personality Traits:** Reclusive +5, Immutable +3, Proud +2

**Combat:**

*Maul (warhammer):* Init --1, Attack +11, Defense +3, Damage +15

**Soak:** +10

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--7), --3 (8--14), --5 (15--21),
Incapacitated (22--28), Dead (29+)

**Abilities:** Arabic 5 (stone), Athletics 3 (climbing), Great Weapon 4
(maul), Profession: Miner 3 (gemstones), Second Sight 4 (jinn),
Theology: Islam 3 (jinn).

**Powers:**

*Flesh to Stone,* 2 points, Init --4, Terram; Baghl can change any human
he touches into stone until sunrise or until the morning call to prayer
(Base 20, +1 Touch, +2 Sun).

*Ruler of Earth*, 1--3 points, Init 0, Terram; Duplicates any non-Ritual
Perdo Terram or Rego Terram spell less than or equal to 15th level at a
cost of 1 Might point per magnitude of the effect.

*Incorporeal*, 0 points, Init Constant, Mentem: Baghl is naturally both
invisible and intangible, and cannot be influenced by the physical
world. Magic can only directly target him if the caster can sense his
existence. In this form he has no physical statistics or combat scores.
Without taking a corporeal form, Baghl's physical characteristics are
only used when dealing with other incorporeal creatures.

*Donning the Corporeal Veil*, 2 points, Init +1, Corpus: Baghl can form
the physical body described under Appearance to house his spiritual
form; when doing so he acquires the physical characteristics, size,
combat statistics, and Wound levels listed earlier. His arms and armor
are also created with this power. He cannot become fatigued. This body
lasts until he decides he no longer needs it. Killing the body does not
kill Baghl.

*Presence*, 0 points, constant, Mentem: Baghl is aware of everything
that goes on within his haunt. This power needs to Penetrate to perceive
beings with a Magic Resistance.

**Vis:** 1 pawn of Terram vis can be collected every year from his
haunt, in the form of a quartz-encrusted stalactite at the back of his
cave. If slain in physical form, his body yields 3 pawns of Terram vis.

**Appearance:** Baghl is the jinni of a dark cave found in the Elbruz
mountains that was once used as a quarry until he drove off the miners.
He may be appeased mainly by being left alone to enjoy his beautiful
cave formations, although he sometimes agrees to converse with
theological scholars. He appears as an obese man with a mule\'s head,
pupilless eyes of jet-black stone, and quartz-veined limbs that heft an
oversized maul. In physical form he can also assume the shape of a large
black mule.

Jinn

The Free Virtue Jinn marks out a category of spirits associated with the
Islamic lands. They are all vulnerable to the magic of the Sahirs (see
*The Cradle and the Crescent,* Chapter 3), and may be part of the Magic,
Faerie, or Infernal realms. See *The Cradle and the Crescent,* Chapter
4, for more information.

Caladrius

**Magic Might:** 14 (Animal)

**Characteristics:** Cun --1, Per +2, Pre +1, Com --2, Str --4, Sta +3,
Dex +1, Qik +2

**Size:** --2

**Virtues and Flaws:** Unaffected by the Gift, Lesser Immunity (to
non-lethal diseases); Compassionate (minor), Noncombatant

**Personality Traits:** Ibis\* +3, Magnificent Appearance (Presence)\*
+3

**Combat:**

*Dodge:* Init +2, Attack n/a, Defense +5, Damage n/a

**Soak:** +3

**Fatigue Levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--3), --3 (4--6), --5 (7--9), Incapacitated
(10--12), Dead (13+)

**Abilities:** Athletics 3 (flying), Awareness 4 (food), Brawl 2
(dodging), Ignem Resistance (solar heat) 4, Survival 3 (wetlands)

**Powers:**

*Healing Gaze*, 4 points, Init --14, Corpus

R: Eye, D: Mom, T: Ind

By gazing into a person\'s eyes, the caladrius can draw out any
non-fatal disease from a sick person into itself. This removes any
disease of up to Incapacitating strength, or resolves a critical or
lesser aging crisis. The caladrius must immediately fly up toward the
sun or else the disease returns to the patient.

CrCo 40 (Base 30, +1 Eye, +1 affect either disease or aging)

*Perceive the Afflictions of Mortal Flesh*, 0 points, Init +1, Corpus

R: Per, D: Mom, T: Sight

By sight, the caladrius can identify any diseases a person has and how
serious they are.

InCo 25 (Base 5, +4 Sight)

**Vis:** 3 Corpus (1 in each eye, 1 in the wings)

**Appearance:** The caladrius is a magnificent, all-white bird somewhat
resembling a heron (but with shorter legs and beak). It has a long,
gracefully curving neck and a short, slightly downward-curving beak.

*If anyone is ill, the caladrius will tell whether the patient will live
or die.*

--- Pierre de Beauvais

A caladrius is a mystical bird much sought by royal households. It can
determine whether a sick person will live or die. If the patient is to
die, the caladrius sadly turns away from him, but if he is to live, it
gazes deeply into his eyes, drawing the sickness into itself. It then
flies away toward the sun, going so high that the sun\'s rays burn away
the disease (but they do not harm the caladrius itself).

A caladrius will not absorb a terminal illness (its Lesser Immunity
would not protect it), but it will gladly heal any lesser ailment. It
can heal either spontaneous diseases, which result from aging crises or
diseases due to an external cause. As long as the crisis is not terminal
or the disease does not cause a Lethal Wound, a caladrius can cure it.
It can only heal wounds caused by disease, not those resulting from
poison, combat, or other causes. It cannot remove Decrepitude.

*Story Seed: The Imprisoned Caladrius*

Both kings and magi greatly prize the caladrius for its healing powers.
Such a powerful character has captured a caladrius and plans to keep it
until his next aging crisis. The kind-hearted bird wants only to be set
free so it can use its healing power to help others. Perhaps it finds a
way to ask the characters for help, or maybe it escapes on its own and
the characters are accused of stealing it.

Essential Traits

Essential traits are possessed by some creatures affected by the Magic
Realm, and indicate features of their being that are part of their
essential nature. Magic cannot, therefore, make them act against those
traits. They are indicated with an asterisk in the character statistics;
for more details, see *Realms of Power: Magic,* page 54.

Daimons

Daimons are ancient, named, individual spirits that dwell in the depths
of the Magic Realm. They are the spirits of heroes and of ancient pagan
deities, or the powerful spirits of sacred groves. Unlike simpler
spirits, a Daimon can manifest in several places simultaneously,
projecting only an **Aspect** of itself.

A Daimon is a permanent resident of the Magic Realm and cannot enter the
material world; instead, it creates an Aspect as its agent on Earth. An
Aspect may be created or destroyed with a moment\'s thought, and costs
no Might points to create. Each Aspect is like an independent spirit,
with some or all of the characteristics and powers of the original
spirit, but its own Might score (less than or equal to that of the
parent Daimon), and its own pool of Might points. An Aspect cannot
recover spent Might points, rather it is dispelled when exhausted and
replaced (if necessary) with another Aspect. Aspects that can take
physical damage are incapable of healing, but can be replaced when they
die. An Aspect that loses all its Might Points or takes an
Incapacitating wound, or loses consciousness for any reason, disappears,
returning to the Daimon. Defeating or destroying the Aspect has no
impact on the originating Daimon, except perhaps on its disposition
towards the perpetrators of these acts. No permanent changes can be made
to any Aspect, as they never last. Only the Aspect is ever trapped or
bound by magic, and the Daimon can escape by discarding the Aspect. An
Aspect cannot appear within several miles of another Aspect of the same
Daimon, and no Aspect can return to the same location (as defined by the
storyguide) within a day of leaving it. Not all Aspects created by the
same Daimon need be identical; designed for different functions, they
might have different powers and Mights. (See "The Twilight of the Gods"
in *Dies Irae* for an example.)

An Aspect is a constant Arcane Connection of indefinite duration which
is in constant mental contact with its Daimon. In theory, an Aspect
could be used to target spells of Arcane Connection Range against its
parent Daimon, but the need to cross the boundary between realms to the
Magic Realm makes this a difficult proposition. *Realms of Power: Magic*
contains more detail on the Magic Realm and the magic needed to deal
with it.

As Daimons only ever send Aspects out of the Magic Realm, you do not
need to decide on statistics for a Daimon unless the characters travel
to the Magic Realm to find and confront it. If those statistics are
needed, a Daimon has all powers possessed by any of its Aspects, and may
have more, and has a Might at least equal to the highest Might of any of
its Aspects. Its Might Score may be higher, but should still be no
higher than 100. As a guideline, the Daimon itself should have a Might
of at least 50, even if its Aspects have Might Scores of 10 or 15. In
theory, a Daimon could have a single Aspect, and have exactly the same
statistics as that Aspect, but it would still be fundamentally different
from a simple magical spirit with the same statistics, as the Daimon can
manifest multiple Aspects at the same time.

Hermetic magi do not understand Daimons very well, and many of the best
informed are in Mystery Cults (as described in *The Mysteries Revised
Edition,* Chapter 9), and thus not inclined to share what they do know.
This obscurity is compounded by the fact that, in 1220, Hermetic magi
have a very poor understanding of the Magic Realm, and to the best of
the Order's knowledge no magus has ever encountered a Daimon on its home
territory.

Summoning Aspects of Daimons is typically difficult, and based on
remnants of non-Hermetic magic. Ordinary Hermetic magic cannot summon an
Aspect of a Daimon from the Magic Realm; a maga must know the mysteries
of theurgy to achieve this (see *The Mysteries Revised Edition,* Chapter
9). It involves long invocations, typically in praise of the spirit to
be summoned, and invoking and imploring other spirits, and as such the
Church would frown most heavily upon it. St. Augustine in *The City of
God* distinguishes between *dulia*, or praise and honor accorded to a
man or power in accordance with their proper dignity, such as the
veneration due to a saint, and *latria*, praise and honor which should
only be accorded to God. Magi who deal with spirits and adjure them by
name are often accused of surpassing dulia, and straying into worship of
these Daimons, a terrible sin.

An Aspect that has been summoned can be affected by magic just like any
other spirit, and can even be controlled or bound, with the caveat that
the Daimon can simply dissolve the Aspect and send a new one to escape
the binding.

This section includes game statistics for a few sample Aspects of
Daimons. Storyguides may design others using their knowledge of
mythology and the needs of their saga.

True Names and Synthemata

A **True Name** is a secret name that is an expression of the spiritual
essence of an entity; a special formula of strange incantations and
gestures that takes only a few moments to recite, but is difficult to
learn. A True Name is an Arcane Connection of indefinite duration, and
is often the only Arcane Connections possible to a Daimon. Only
creatures with a Might score have a True Name, but not all creatures
with a Might score do. All demons, angels, jinn, and Daimons have a True
Name, as do other intelligent entities with a unique personality; the
storyguide is the ultimate arbiter as to which creatures have a True
Name and which do not. Each True Name is a spell-like ability recorded
as \"True Name of (Being)\" on the character sheet, and costs 5
experience points to learn. These points can come from Practice,
Exposure, or Adventure; or from an Advancement Total dedicated to the
appropriate (Realm) Lore. You receive one free experience point in the
(Realm) Lore whenever the character learns a True Name completely.

The True Name of a Daimon is also an indefinite duration Arcane
Connection to all of its Aspects, although a magus needs to specify
which Aspect a spell is intended to target. If the Arcane Connection is
being used to increase the Penetration of a spell that is being targeted
by other means, the target is already specified, but this may be more
difficult for a spell at Arcane Connection range.

**Synthemata** are signs, symbols, or passwords that link a magician to
a supernatural creature; any being with a Might score has synthemata,
regardless of whether they also have a True Name. Theurgic spells
include these magical words in the formula of incantation; while
granting no actual power, they are necessary for the correct operation
of this magic, and remain a secret of the craft. Some magi and hedge
wizards have the ability to work the correct synthemata into their magic
as an intense and powerful channel to a spirit, so that they may command
them through this channel. Virtues to work such magic are described in
*The Mysteries Revised Edition*, pages 86--88. Knowing the True Name of
a creature adds 5 to all lab totals to research synthemata for that same
being.

Aneirin the Bard

**Magic Might:** 15 (Imaginem)

**Characteristics:** Int +3, Per +3, Pre +2, Com +4, Str n/a, Sta n/a,
Dex n/a, Qik n/a

**Size:** n/a

**Personality Traits:** Careful +3, Observant +2,

**Combat:**

*n/a*

**Soak:** n/a

**Wound Penalties:** n/a

**Abilities:** Area Lore Stonehenge Tribunal 10, Magic Lore 8, Music 12,
Teaching 5

**Powers:**

*Discorporate*, 0 points, Vim: Aneirin never physically manifests, save
as a shadow and a melodic voice. He can only be harmed with magic.

*Names of Power,* 0 points Aneirin knows many names of minor spirits and
can teach them as a result of a Pact.

**Vis:** If his spirit is somehow bottled rather than banished 2
Imaginem Vis remains.

One of the five great Welsh poets believed by the Order to have left
Daimons behind after their death (the other four being Taliesin,
Talhaearn Tad Awen, Blwchbardd, and Cian). Famous for a single poem, Y
Gododdin, Aneirin praises his fellows among the war band of Mynyddawg
Mwynfawr (Mynyddawg the Wealthy) of Caereidyn (near Edinburgh), an army
300 strong sent on a doomed mission to recapture an old Roman stronghold
from the Saxons. His tomb lies somewhere in the Cambrian Mountains. His
spirit wanders across the entire mountain range, helping those who
further his ideals and punishing those who go against them, but he is
most powerful within his own tomb.

Chnoubis the Serpent

**Magic Might:** 30 (Mentem)

**Characteristics:** Int +3, Per +6, Pre 0, Com +2, Str 0, Sta +3, Dex
+3, Qik +5

**Size:** --1

**Personality Traits:** Curious +4, Diplomatic +3, Proud +2, Noble +1

**Combat:**

*Bite:* Init +5, Attack +8, Defense +8, Damage +5\*

\* On being bitten the victim must make a Fatigue test against Ease
Factor 9 or lose a Fatigue level each round until he has succeeded for
three consecutive rounds or fallen unconscious. While suffering these
effects, the victim is unable to tell a lie (Penetration 25, Mentem),
and is eager to talk to anyone present about anything on their mind,
talking to themselves if necessary. Once the victim falls unconscious no
further Fatigue is lost, but they awaken with a terrible headache and
must make a Stamina stress roll (plus Art of Memory if they have that
Ability) at Ease Factor 6 to recall what transpired.

**Soak:** +9

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--4), --3 (5--8), --5 (9--12), Banished (13+)

**Powers:**

*Augury*,varies, Init +5, Mentem. By using this power Chnoubis is able
to perform auguries as the Virtue Divination & Augury (see *The
Mysteries Revised Edition,* page 58), with each Might Point allowing ten
levels of success. If you do not have access to *The Mysteries Revised
Edition*, this power allows Chnoubis to duplicate the effects of any
Hermetic Intellego spell, and costs 1 point for every ten levels of the
spell.

*Aura of Rightful Authority*, 4 points, Init +5, Mentem. Equivalent to
the ReMe20 Hermetic spell.

*Discorporation*, varies, 1 point, Init: +7, Mentem. Becomes a
discorporate spirit which can move as fast as lightning and is only
visible to Intellego Vim magics or Second Sight. He sneaks up on victims
invisibly and bites them, then listens to their secrets as the toxin
takes effect.

**Vis:** On being banished his scales remain, containing 3 pawns of
Intellego and 2 of Mentem vis

A lion-headed serpent called upon for his abilities to scry and ferret
out secrets. He claims to be a native of the Nile, but theurgists across
Europe may successfully summon him. True to his visage, Chnoubis is a
powerful fighter, but is much more interested in the power of words.

Dietrich von Bern

**Magic Might:** 35 (Corpus)

**Characteristics:** Int +2, Per +3, Pre +5, Com +3, Str +5, Sta +5, Dex
+5, Qik +3

**Size:** +2

**Personality Traits:** Proud +3, Barbarous +2, Crafty +2

**Combat:**

*Greatsword:* Init +5, Attack+19, Defense +17, Damage +15\*

\*Dietrich's sword has been dipped in dragon's blood. No magical spell
of a level 40 or lower can deflect, harm, or control it. After being
hit, the dragon's blood burns, causing an extra +5 damage per round
(armor does not soak) unless an alchemist, herbalist, or healer can cure
the wound.

**Soak:** +22 (full chain mail drenched in dragon's blood)

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--7), --3 (8--14), --5 (15--21), Banished
(22+)

**Abilities:** Athletics 6, Great Weapon 10, Intrigue 6, Leadership 8

**Powers:**

*Sacred Kingship,* 10 points, Init+3, Vim: By laying hands on another
character, Dietrich can permanently increase the character's Perception,
Presence, or Communication by 1 point. He can only do this once per
person, and can only to a maximum of +3. Increasing Presence this way is
a very useful aid to the aspiring Mystagogue.

**Vis:** 7 Rego

A hero in German poetry and song, Dietrich was the boy-king of Bern
after the fall of Rome. During his reign, several great Nibelungen
heroes, including Siegfried himself, were loyal members of his court.
When his uncle Ermenrik, German ruler of Rome, conquered Bern, Dietrich
fled to the court of Attila the Hun, where he went on many adventures
and became one of the greatest warriors in history. He returned after
his uncle died, retook Bern and captured Rome. He died in a quest for
revenge against a friend who betrayed him, and was buried in an ornate
tomb in the Lessini Mountains, where the Alps cross over into Italy. His
tomb is a treasure trove of weapons and armor, enchanted by being dipped
in the blood of a great dragon Dietrich slew.

When anyone enters the tomb, however, the Daimon of Dietrich animates
his hulking corpse. If you come seeking wisdom and prove yourself
worthy, he will dispense kingly advice. If you come seeking power, you
will face one of the greatest warriors on Earth, even in death. Another
legend propagated by the Church says Dietrich, a heretic suspected of
Arianism, was thrown into the volcanic Mount Etna. The legend of
Dietrich appears in *Das Heldenbuch* ("The Book of Heroes") a collection
of German romances published in the early 13th century, organizing the
tales of the Ostrogoths and Franconians into two epic cycles.

Gydryty-kom the Giant

**Magic Might:** 40 (Auram)

**Characteristics:** Int 0, Per +1, Pre 0, Com --2, Str +8, Sta +6, Dex
+3, Qik +3

**Size:** +3

**Personality Traits:** Hates Being Interrupted +4, Determined +3,
Protective +2

**Combat:**

*Brawl:* Init +3, Attack +10, Defense +10, Damage +8

**Soak:** +20

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--8), --3 (9--16), --5 (17--24), Banished
(25+)

**Powers:**

*Auram Magic*, varies, Init +3, Auram: May perform equivalent effects to
any Auram magic at a cost of 1 point per magnitude, or for spells
involving hail, 1 point per three magnitudes. Can perform Auram Ritual
spells as if they were Formulaic spells; no extra time or vis is
required.

*Swallow Spells*, 5 points, Init +3, Vim: Can swallow any magical spell
or effect with a level of 50 or less, completely dispelling it.

**Vis:** When he is banished his tongue remains, and contains 8 pawns of
Auram Vis.

Gydryty-kom is the master of hail, a giant who can stretch his mouth
from the ground to the clouds. He swallows storms and lightning, but
grows angry when summoned because it interrupts his eternal battle with
a Daimonic snake of fog that threatens to swallow the world. Gydryty-kom
was once highly regarded in the lands of the Albanians, but his power
has faded thanks to Christianity.

Hipta the Nurse

**Magic Might:** 15 (Animal)

**Characteristics:** Int +3, Per +1, Pre +3, Com +2, Str varies, Sta
varies, Dex varies, Qik varies

**Size:** varies from --5 to +2

**Personality Traits:** Calm +4, Protective +2

**Combat:**

Varies with form

**Soak:** varies

**Wound Penalties:** Varies by form. Substitute Banished for
Incapacitated

**Powers:**

*Shapechange*, 1 point, Init +5, Animal: May change form into any
natural or fantastic beast from size --5 to +2. The change is
instantaneous, and she can always speak in any form.

*Dispel*, varies, Init +5, Vim: May perform any Perdo Vim spell at will,
for the cost one Might point per magnitude. Hipta counts as familiar
with all styles of magic for this purpose, and has a Penetration Score
of 30, making invoking her a common way to end malevolent curses.

**Vis:** Leaves 3 pawns of Animal Vis in the form of a white feather
when banished.

The nurse of Dionysus, Hipta is a powerful shapechanger but favors the
form of a lovely dove. Her name and spells to summon her can be found in
several ancient texts. She is invoked for forgiveness from curses and
magical harm.

Honos

**Magic Might:** 30 (Corpus)

**Characteristics:** Int 0, Per +1, Pre +2, Com +1, Str +3, Sta +5, Dex
+4, Qik +4

**Size:** 0

**Personality Traits:** Honorable +6, Authoritarian +3, Disciplined +3.

**Combat:**

*Long Spear:* Init +7, Attack+14, Defense +12, Damage +10

**Soak:** +14 (silver cuirass)

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--20),
Incapacitated (21--25), Banished (26+)

**Abilities:** Athletics 4, Great Weapon (long spear) 6, Leadership 6,
Teaching (leadership) 3

**Powers:**

*Instill Leadership*, 5 points, Init +4, Mentem: With a touch of his
long spear, Honos can teach 17 experience points in the ability
Leadership, to a maximum of Ability score 6. The Theurgist receives the
insights immediately, but must then devote the season to study and
reflecting upon them to gain the increase.

*Centurions' Feast*, 30 points, Init +4, Corpus: Produces a magical
feast sufficient to feed one hundred people. All who partake of the
feast who possess the Flaw Dutybound are instantly cured of any Light
and Medium Wounds, and gain +10 on their next recovery checks. The food
lasts for one hour, then dissipates, but the effects are permanent.

**Vis:** Leaves 6 pawns of Corpus in his armor when banished.

Honos is a Roman Daimon of morality and military honor, with several
temples built in his name. Honos appears as a young warrior in ancient
armor, carrying a lance and a cornucopia ("horn of plenty"). Honos'
temples in Rome have been destroyed or blanketed by the Dominion,
although the Legion of Mithras are rumored to know the location of one
surviving shrine where he can be invoked.

Portunes, Spirit of Safe Harbor

**Magic Might:** 25 (Auram)

**Characteristics:** Int +1, Per +3, Pre 0, Com +1, Str 0, Sta 0, Dex 0,
Qik 0

**Size:** n/a

**Personality Traits:** Watchful +3

**Combat:** None. Vanishes if attacked, and can only be harmed by Perdo
Vim spells.

**Soak:** n/a (never materializes)

**Wound Penalties:** n/a

**Powers:**

*Safe Harbor*, 12 points, Init 0, Auram: Guarantees calm weather in the
harbor of a port for an entire season, and resists all spells that would
disrupt this with a Magic Resistance of 60.

*Opening Enchanted Locks*, 8 points, Init 0, Vim: Portunes can dispel
any magical lock with a level of less then 40 with this power.

**Vis:** None.

A Spirit charged with ports and harbors, the Greeks called him Palaemon
and Melicertes. His purview also covers keys, locks, and domestic
animals. In Rome he was worshipped as a god, with a temple located near
the Forum Boarium. His feast, the Portunalia, is observed on August
17th. The rite to summon him involves throwing keys into a fire. When
summoned, he appears either as a ghostly serpent or the shadowy visage
of a bearded man in a leather apron, but he never takes on a solid
physical form.

Pukis, Dragon of the Hearth

**Magic Might:** 10 (Ignem)

**Characteristics:** Int --1, Per +3, Pre 0, Com 0, Str --1, Sta +4,
Dex+3, Qik +6

**Size:** --2

**Personality Traits:** Mischievous +3, Loyal +3, Fickle +2

**Combat**

*Bite*: Init +5, Attack +6, Defense+9, Damage +3

*Lashing tail*: Init +6, Attack +10, Defense +13, Damage +0

\*Although small, Pukis is long and thin. It can engage 2 opponents
without penalty, attacking one with its jaws and the other with its
quick tail. It is also burning hot, and can ignite easily flammable
materials on touch.

**Soak:** +8 (leathery hide)

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--3), --3 (4--6), --5 (7--9), Banished (10+)

**Powers:**

*Invisibility,* 3 points, Init +6, Imaginem: Pukis can turn itself
completely invisible and inaudible, for as long as it chooses, or until
it touches a person or animal.

*Mischievous Flame,* 2 points, Init +6, Ignem: With a glance, Pukis can
set anything slightly flammable aflame.

*Sneak Thief,* 5 points, Init +6, Terram: By touching any object
weighing less than 3 pounds, Pukis can instantly teleport the object to
its home so that it appears at the edge of its master's hearth.

*Sacred Fire,* 0 points, Init +6, Ignem: As long as Pukis lives in a
particular hearth, and the fire is kept hot year round, the ashes from
the fire can be collected for 1 pawn of Ignem per season.

**Vis:** 2 Ignem, 1 Rego

First summoned by Baltic wizards, this Daimon takes the form of a small
dragon of fire that dwells in the hearth or a fireplace. It enjoys
napping amongst burning logs and coals, coiling its long-snake like body
beneath the flames to conceal its presence. It will leave gifts for the
master of the household, possibly stolen from somewhere else, and will
attack strangers if they act destructively. If it is treated poorly, it
will cause mischief before departing. The magus Andrilikes, a theurgist
of the Novgorod tribunal, wrote a Hermetic ritual for summoning this
lesser Daimon to his sanctum, and has given copies to several of his
friends.

Elementals

Elementals are magical creatures composed of very pure elemental matter.
They are not truly alive, and are capable of neither growth nor
reproduction. Instead, they form from pure physical matter under some
magical impetus, such as a Magic aura. Nothing that is or has been alive
can generate an elemental, nor can matter that is no longer in a raw
state, but which has been moved, cut, or otherwise interfered with by a
living being.

The process of forming an elemental is called **rarefication**. This
process causes atoms of matter to take on a pseudo-life of their own,
freeing themselves from the atoms of other elements and self-organizing
into an elemental. Usually only one elemental forms, of a maximum size
determined by the amount of matter present. Magi of the Order know
spells that can catalyze this process, but they may also create
elementals by accident with careless use of elemental magic (see below
for more details). Further, raw elemental matter possessing a Warping
Score of 5 may spontaneously rarefy into an elemental; for example, a
natural spring within a Magic aura of 6 might generate a water elemental
after 75 years. However, not all Warped matter develops an elemental,
and this process is little understood even by those who have studied it.

Once rarefied, the elemental exists until it is destroyed; elementals do
not age, have no need for nutrition, and do not succumb to disease. They
suffer from impulses that drive them to certain actions based on their
elemental make-up, but they possess no capacity for thought in the
traditional sense.

A Digression into Physics

The universe is made up of building blocks called **atoms** (from
*atomas*, meaning "uncuttable"). There are four varieties of atoms, and
each atom possesses two qualities that govern its nature: earth is cold
and dry; water is cold and moist; air is hot and moist; and fire is hot
and dry. The **corpuscles** of atoms are the basic building blocks of
all matter, and have size, shape, and color. Corpuscles of earth are
cubes, those of water are icosahedrons (shaped like a 20-sided die), air
corpuscles are octahedrons (an eight-sided die), and fire corpuscles are
tetrahedrons (a four-sided die or pyramid). The size of the corpuscles
determine the type of matter that it forms. Small tetrahedral corpuscles
make up the fine blue fire that gives the sky its color; whereas large
smoky flames are made from the largest corpuscles of fire. Air that is
thin and pure is formed from small octahedra; whereas mist is made from
large, dense octahedra. Oil receives its thickness from its large
corpuscles of water; but very fine atoms make up volatile liquids like
spirit of wine. Rock is made of large and heavy corpuscles; whereas sand
is made of much finer cubes.

The moist quality causes a thing to adapt to its external conditions,
whereas dryness causes a thing to define its own shape and bounds. As a
consequence, moist things tend to be volatile and expansive, since they
can fill spaces in their surroundings, whereas dry things are fixed and
structured. Hotness causes matter to separate and seek those of its own
kind, but coldness promotes mixing of matter and coagulation. The world
is formed of four regions of elemental matter, with the self-defining
dry elements forming the innermost layer of earth and the outermost
layer of fire. The two cold elements sink to the center of the earth
whereas the two hot ones seek to separate and rise, leaving the final
order, from the center, as earth, water, air, and fire. Beyond the
region of fire is the Lunar Sphere, which separates the material and the
celestial realms. More details on this issue can be found in *Art &
Academe*.

Elementals and Might

An elemental does not replenish its Might Pool every day, but instead
only recovers Might Points when resting in a Magic aura of no less than
(its Might Score / 5), and at an extremely slow rate. It takes the
character an entire season to recover all of its spent Might in this
way, though like other magic creatures it can still regain Might Points
immediately by consuming vis: 5 Might Points for every pawn of vis
associated with same Form as its Might, or 2 Might Points for every pawn
of vis associated with any other Art.

Magic and Elementals

Some magi who are skilled in elemental magic routinely create and bind
elementals to their bidding, but the primitive sentience of these
beings, combined with the difficulty in obtaining the appropriate raw
materials and vis required, means that most do not bother. Ritual Creo
spells can create elementals, and they may be controlled using Rego
magic. In addition, standard Rego guidelines may also create wards (or
prisons) for elementals with spells that affect creatures from the Magic
Realm, and Perdo Vim spells can destroy the Magic Might that animates
their simple bodies.

Other spells involving the elemental Forms may accidentally cause an
elemental to rarefy, if cast on sufficiently pure matter that is already
substantially Warped, such as that found within a Magic aura. The
production of an elemental is a potential consequence of any botched
spell or lab activity involving an elemental Form while in a Magic aura.
Similarly, magic used to purify an element can have a similar effect ---
more than one Flambeau magus has tried to make his flames hotter, and
accidentally rarefied a fire elemental.

Size, Might, and Characteristics of Elementals

The Size of an elemental is dependent on the Might chosen for it, and
the Might of an elemental also determines its typical Characteristics.
The table below indicates values for the eight Characteristics at
different Might scores.

Might Size Characteristics

1 --18 +2, +2, +1, +1, +1, 0, --1, --1

5 --6 +3, +2, +1, +1, 0, 0, --1, --2

10 --3 +3, +3, +1, +1, 0, 0, --1, --3

15 0 +4, +3, +2, +1, 0, 0, --2, --4

20 +3 +6, +5, +2, +2, +1, 0, --5, --6

25 +6 +7, +6, +2, +2, +1, 0, --6, --7

30 +9 +8, +6, +2, +2, +1, 0, --6, --8

35 +12 +9, +7, +2, +2, +1, 0, --7, --9

40 +15 +10, +8, +2, +2, +1, 0, --8, --10

45 +18 +11, +9, +2, +2, +1, 0, --9, --11

50 +21 +12, +9, +2, +2, +1, 0, --9, --12

Elemental Combat

Elementals are not living, thus they cannot suffer wounds; instead, each
blow separates some of their substance from their animating force. In
practice, this works the same as inflicting wounds on a living creature,
but each wound also reduces the elemental\'s Might Pool by a number of
points equal to the Wound Penalty. An Incapacitating Wound removes 5
Might points, just like a Heavy Wound. The elemental\'s Might score does
not change, so there is no need to recalculate Size following a wound.

An elemental that is reduced to a Might Pool of zero loses its animating
force and becomes inanimate. In this state it can easily be mistaken for
raw vis. As soon as the elemental regenerates a point of Might pool it
can move again, but since elementals do not naturally regenerate Might,
they have difficulty recovering it. An elemental could remain dormant
for many years before the presence of the correct flavor of vis brings
it back to pseudo-life.

The pieces of the elemental\'s body broken off during physical combat
contain vis. Each time the character is wounded, part of its body is
separated from the rest, and these pieces contain some of the
elemental's vis, a number of pawns equal to ((total Wound penalty / 5)
-- the number of pawns already lost). For example, a Light wound would
separate a pawn of vis from the character, and produce another pawn
after five more Light wounds. This vis is easily collected for water and
earth elementals, less so for air and fire elementals. This vis can be
used by a magus to power spells before the elemental is destroyed,
although it is often difficult to collect it in the middle of a fight.
In addition, the elemental instinctively tries to reunite its matter
with itself, and may well manage to re-absorb the vis and replenish its
Might pool. If an elemental is damaged by destroying its matter ---
using Perdo (Form) or Perdo Vim spells, or water against a fire
elemental, for example --- then the vis is also destroyed.

Elemental Powers

All elementals have a power that results from the elemental matter from
which their bodies are made, and a power that describes their natural
method of attack. Magic Resistance can prevent the elemental from
touching its opponent, but the elemental does not need to spend Might
points for this attack, meaning that its Penetration for this is
typically equal to its Might. Most elementals have at least one other
power. This power should be strongly tied to the type and origin of the
magical entity. Typical powers are listed with the descriptions of the
elementals.

Story Seeds

**The Forgotten Child**

A magus uses *Incantation of Lightning* (or a similar spell of 6th
magnitude or greater) in a Magic aura, which inflicts the last Warping
point needed to rarefy an elemental. Unaware of what he\'s done, he
moves on. The elemental he has unwittingly created causes no end of
trouble for the locals. Eventually the magus discovers his error, and
must put right what he has wrought.

**The Unforgiving Sea**

Concerned that a colleague has not been heard from for a while, the
player magi are dispatched to see if anything is wrong. The magus --- an
expert in Aquam --- discovered a way to increase the Might (and size) of
his pet water elemental, using raw Aquam vis that he transferred into a
sufficient quantity of pure elemental matter. The infused water was then
absorbed by the elemental as the magus cast a Creo Aquam spell (with a
Vim requisite) of his own devising. Unfortunately for the magus, the
elemental became too powerful for him to control, and he is now trapped
in his sanctum. Alternatively, the characters may just come across his
shattered laboratory and his lab texts, and not realize the danger
involved in re-creating his work.

**Lunchtime in the Vis Stores**

The characters discover some Terram vis in a patch of clay lying in a
region with no mystical aura. They take it home to their covenant and
put it in their vis stores. Now that it is in a Magic aura, the
elemental can start to recover its exhausted Might pool, and it consumes
the magi\'s other Terram vis to make itself larger. When the characters
next visit their vis stores, they are in for a surprise.

Earth Elementals

The earth elementals are known to the Order as **genomi** (singular
genomus, meaning "earth-living"), but they go by a number of other names
including gnomes (contracted from their Hermetic name), pygmaei, and
telluri. They may be rarefied from any large concretion of earth that
has not been worked by human hands, such as untilled soil, natural rock
features, and naturally occurring nuggets of metal. It is no harder to
rarefy a genomus from soil than it is from metal, but the quantity of
raw material available limits the size of the elemental created --- a
gold nugget of Size --10 can only produce an elemental with Might 3.
Genomi are extraordinarily long-lived, and are as durable as the
substance from which they are formed. They are patient predators, driven
by an unslakable thirst to extract the delicious moisture from living
beings. They are fiercely territorial, and will attack any being who
intrudes upon their defined space; thus genomi make excellent guards ---
most attacks from a genomus result from having stood upon one!

An earth elemental appears much like any other object of earth or rock,
except it is made up of sharp edges and right-angled corners that form
cubic corpuscles of different sizes. Earth elementals move by sliding
these cubic components around in endless cycles; this appears awkward
and laborious in hard-bodied genomi, but can be hypnotically smooth in
those made of sand or soil. Genomi are exceptionally strong and
remarkably fast. An earth elemental made from a hard substance attacks
by bludgeoning its prey with its stone limbs. Softer genomi of sand and
soil will engulf their prey first by making a grapple attack, and then
crush the immobilized target within their bodies.

The elemental\'s body is composed entirely of soil, sand, or rock. It
can match a walking man for speed, and overtake a running horse when
tumbling downhill. Only bludgeoning weapons such as hammers, maces, or
axes can damage an earth elemental; piercing or slashing weapons merely
plunge into the body of a soil elemental or glance off the surface of a
rock elemental. Spades and picks are also effective weapons.

Sample Powers

All earth elementals have the following power:

*Crush*, 0 points, Init equal to (Qik--2), Terram

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

The elemental clubs at an opponent with its heavy limbs, requiring a
normal Bludgeon melee attack, which does its own damage as normal. If
the elemental is at least equal in Size to its opponent, a successful
Crush attack can pin him to the ground, and the elemental adds its
(Might/5, rounded up) to its Grapple Strength to prevent its victim
escaping. If the elemental successfully grapples, then any equipment
carried by its victim is damaged; fragile items are destroyed, robust
items are broken (and are destroyed if affected again by this power),
and metal items are damaged (and are broken if affected again by this
power).

Re(Pe)Te 30 (Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +2 affect stone, +1 requisite, +1
constant effect)

Some earth elementals have the following powers. Other powers typically
mimic Terram spells, particularly Rego Terram spells.

*The Red Touch*, 1 point, Init equal to (Qik + 5), Terram

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

The touch of the elemental can rust metal; every time it is struck in
combat by a metal object, or successfully strikes a being with metal
armor, it can convert that metal into a thoroughly rusted object that
will crumble to dust.

PeTe 10 (Base 3, +1 Touch, +2 affect metal)

*Slake Thirst*, 1 point, Init equal to (Qik + 4), Aquam

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Part

Earth elementals are always thirsty, and direct contact with the
elemental removes water from the target, inflicting a Fatigue level of
damage. Once all Fatigue levels are gone, successive strikes (or rounds
of contact) inflict a Light Wound, then a Medium Wound, then a Heavy
Wound, and so forth. Fatigue levels may be restored by drinking at least
two pints of water (for a Size 0 individual), while wounds are healed as
normal.

PeAq 15 (Base 5, +1 Touch, +1 Part)

An Earth Elemental

**Magic Might:** 15 (Terram)

**Characteristics:** Cun 0, Per +1, Pre --2, Com --4, Str +3, Sta +6,
Dex +2, Qik 0

**Size:** 0

**Virtues and Flaws:** Berserk, Great Stamina, Tough, Ways of the
Cavern; Poor Memory, Short Attention Span, Simple Minded.

**Personality Traits:** Cave +3\*

**Combat:**

*Bludgeon\*:* Init +3, Attack +11, Defense +7, Damage +9

*Bludgeon when Berserk\*:* Init +3, Attack +13, Defense --5, Damage +9

\*Includes Ways of the Cavern

**Soak:** +9 (additional +2 when Berserk)

**Wound Penalties**: --1 & 1 Might point (1--5), --3 & 3 Might points
(6--10), --5 & 5 Might points (11--15), Incapacitated & 5 Might points
(16--20), Dead & all Might points (21+)

**Abilities:** Athletics 3 (pursuit), Awareness 2 (interlopers), Brawl 3
(bludgeon), Penetration 3 (*Slake Thirst* Power), Stealth 2 (keeping
still)

**Powers:**

*Crush*, 0 points, Init --2, Terram: see above for details

*Slake Thirst*, 1 point, Init +4, Aquam: see above for details

**Vis:** 3 pawns of Terram, in body

**Note:** This elemental was rarefied in a cavern with a Magic aura, and
guards the vis source found therein with a furious passion.

Water Elementals

The **lymphae** ("pure waters") are also called undines, undena, or
ondines (all from Latin *unda*, meaning "fluid, wave"), as well as
aquacolae ("water dwellers"), nymphs (a term also applied to certain
faeries), and alcyones. Only naturally occurring liquids can produce
elementals, typically of salt or fresh water. Water that has been
separated from its source cannot be rarefied into a lympha, nor can
liquid extracted from its source by human effort. Lymphae in a relaxed
state sink into a thin film or puddle, perhaps even soaking into the
ground. They can pull themselves up into symmetrical humps faceted with
triangular units --- their corpuscles are naturally icosahedral. The
fluid that makes them is always of the utmost purity, often crystal
clear and sparkling.

Lymphae have the best capacity for learning and understanding of all
elementals, and are remarkably resilient to damage. However, their slow
and languorous movements make them unsuitable as protectors. They are
driven by their nature to collect and mix substances together, and their
homes are often the site of eclectic collections of garbage that they
have gathered. They commonly attack by pulling their opponents down to
the ground and then smothering them, separating and recombining their
possessions with an obsessive interest.

A water elemental\'s body is composed entirely of water. It can roll
across the ground, either slowly if derived from a body of still water,
or as fast as the current if from a river or stream. The elemental\'s
speed is halved if moving up even a gentle incline. Most weapons are
meaningless to a lympha --- blades and piercing weapons simply pass
straight through, although bludgeoning weapons can still harm them. A
water elemental\'s attacks only inflict Scuffle damage, and it often
attempts to disarm, trip, or grab worn items with its Attack Advantage
rather than inflict damage. A source of fire that does damage less than
the elemental\'s Might is extinguished on contact, while more-powerful
flames will evaporate the elemental\'s body, inflicting "wounds" as
normal. Successful fire attacks destroy any Aquam vis that might have
been present in the evaporated matter.

Sample Powers

All water elementals have the following power:

*Drown*, 0 points, Init equal to (Qik -- 2), Aquam

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

After successful melee attack, the elemental can engulf a target whose
Size is smaller than its own and attempt to drown him, necessitating a
roll to avoid deprivation. The victim can attempt to escape from its
clutches each round using the Grappling rules.

ReAq(Co) 30 (Base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 requisite, +1 constant effect)

Some water elementals have the following powers. Other powers typically
mimic Aquam spells, particularly Rego Aquam spells.

*Chill Touch*, 2 points, Init equal to (Qik + 4), Ignem

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

The lympha\'s touch extracts heat from a target, inflicting +10 damage.
This damage is Soaked without the benefit of armor, as the watery body
of the elemental seeps through all protection.

PeIg 15 (Base 10, +1 Touch)

*Sight of the River*, 2 points, Init equal to (Qik -- 1), Imaginem

R: Arc, D: Conc, T: Room

The elemental can view any location to which it has an unbroken
connection of water, regardless of the distance involved. Thus, it may
see anyone on the same river, touching the opposite shores of its sea,
or even standing on the same earth through the water that makes soil
damp. Someone standing on a stone or wood surface would be invisible to
it, however. Anyone who can share senses with the elemental can see what
it sees.

InIm 20 (Base 1, +4 Arcane, +1 Conc, +2 Room)

A Water Elemental

**Magic Might:** 15 (Aquam)

**Characteristics:** Cun +4, Per --2, Pre 0, Com 0, Str +3, Sta +3, Dex
+1, Qik --4

**Size:** 0

**Virtues and Flaws:** Puissant Hunt, Tough, Ways of the River; Poor
Memory, Short Attention Span, Simple Minded.

**Personality Traits:** River +3\*

**Combat:**

*Bludgeon:* Init --4, Attack +8, Defense +3, Damage +6

*Bludgeon\*:* Init --1, Attack +11, Defense +6, Damage +6

\*Includes Ways of the River

**Soak:** +6

**Wound Penalties**: --1 & 1 Might point (1--5), --3 & 3 Might points
(6--10), --5 & 5 Might points (11--15), Incapacitated & 5 Might points
(16--20), Dead & all Might points (21+)

**Abilities:** Athletics 2 (when hunting), Brawl 3 (bludgeon), Hunt 3+3
(river banks), Penetration 2 (*Chill Touch* power), Swim 3 (speed)

**Powers:**

*Drown*, 0 points, Init +0, Aquam: see above for details.

*Chill Touch*, 2 point, Init 0, Ignem: see above for details.

*Crafter of Water*, 1 -- 3 points, Init --4 -- Might Cost, Aquam:
duplicate any Creo Aquam or Rego Aquam spell of level 15 or below, at a
cost of 1 Might point per magnitude of the spell.

**Vis:** 3 pawns of Aquam, in body

**Notes:** This lympha haunts the river banks near its home, preying on
the warmth of small creatures who dwell there.

Air Elementals

**Zephyrus** is the name given to an air elemental by members of the
Order of Hermes, but they are also known as silvestres, sylphs, aeoliae
(wind elementals), nenuphas (cloud elementals), and brontes (thunder and
lightning elementals). Any air under the open sky or any natural weather
phenomenon can produce a zephyrus. A zephyrus is composed of chains of
octohedral corpuscles: in wind elementals, these chains form ropes;
cloud elementals consist of interlocked loops; and a lightning elemental
is a branched chain of scintillating energy.

Zephyri are utterly restless --- they cannot remain still, even for a
moment. They are travelers, moving through the world beneath the sky
unless constrained by magic. They rarely descend from their lofty
heights, but are occasionally curious about what is going on below them.
They are highly perceptive, and are aware of everything going on around
their home. They can sense the slightest movement of air from any
direction, and are impossible to catch by surprise. They crave the
disintegration of rigidity and barriers, and many are capable of
dissolving structured matter.

A zephyrus\' body is composed entirely of air. It is capable of moving
through landscape unobstructed by other objects in its way, and can
enter any space that is not air-tight. The speed of movement varies by
elemental type: a mist elemental can roll at walking pace, whereas a
lightning elemental is literally lightning fast. Weapons are meaningless
to a creature with this power, they simply pass straight through.
However, the elemental has no natural attack and must use its powers
instead.

Sample Powers

All air elementals have the following power:

*Suffocate*, 0 points, Init equal to (Qik -- 2), Auram

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

The elemental surrounds its opponent and enters its lungs, necessitating
a roll to avoid deprivation. Escaping the elemental requires the victim
to get away from the elemental; its airy body can be simply walked
through, but the elemental usually pursues its victim. Compare
Quickness + Athletics stress rolls of the victim and the elemental
(using Might/5 for the elemental\'s Athletics); the highest wins. Trying
to escape requires a Fatigue roll for the strenuous action.

PeAu(Co) 30 (Base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 requisite, +1 constant effect)

Some air elementals have the following powers. Other powers typically
mimic Auram spells, particularly Rego Auram spells.

*Dissolution*, 3 points, Init equal to Qik, Animal, Corpus or Terram

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

The cohesiveness of a base Individual of Terram is lost, making it melt
as if heated strongly, although the power imparts no heat to the object.
Armor drips off its wearer, swords collapse like melting butter, and so
forth. At the end of the round, the matter re-solidifies into its new
shape. If the item is enchanted, the elemental\'s Penetration must
exceed five times the total pawns of vis invested. The moisture of
living bodies prevents them from such a devastating effect;
nevertheless, hair, toenails, teeth, claws, and bone are all affected,
inflicting +15 damage and ignoring protection from armor. MuTe(Aq, Co,
An) 25 (Base 3, +2 Voice, +2 affect metal, +2 affect humans and animals)

*Jupiter\'s Touch*, 1 point, Init equal to (Qik -- 1), Auram

R: Touch, D: Mom, T: Ind

The touch of the elemental causes a flash of coruscating lightning,
inflicting +30 damage. This power is suitable for a lightning or storm
elemental.

CrAu 30 (Base 5, +1 Touch, +4 unnatural)

An Air Elemental

**Magic Might:** 15 (Auram)

**Characteristics:** Cun +1, Per +2, Pre 0, Com 0, Str +3, Sta --4, Dex
--2, Qik +4

**Size:** 0

**Virtues and Flaws:** Keen Vision, Shapeshifter, Ways of the Storm;
Poor Memory, Short Attention Span, Simple Minded.

**Personality Traits:** Storm +3\*

**Combat:**

*Jupiter\'s Touch Power\*:* Init +5, Attack +5, Defense n/a, Damage +30

\* Includes Way of the Storms

**Soak:** +0

**Wound Penalties**: --1 & 1 Might point (1--5), --3 & 3 Might points
(6--10), --5 & 5 Might points (11--15), Incapacitated & 5 Might points
(16--20), Dead & all Might points (21+)

**Abilities:** Area Lore 3 (high points), Athletics 3 (storm force
winds), Awareness 3 (metal objects), Brawl 3 (*Jupiter\'s Touch* Power),
Penetration 2 (*Jupiter\'s Touch* Power), Shapeshifter 4 (birds)

**Powers:**

*Suffocate*, 0 points, Init +2, Auram: see above for details

*Jupiter\'s Touch*, 1 point, Init +3, Auram: see above for details

*Charge of the Angry Winds*, 1 point, Init +5, Auram: As the spell of
the same name; add the elemental\'s Strength to all the Ease Factors for
acting within the wind. CrAu 15 (Base 3, +2 Voice, +1 Conc, +1
unnatural)

**Vis:** 3 pawns of Auram, in body.

**Notes:** A creature born of storms, it can be devastating if roused..
Its Shapeshifter Virtue allows it to adopt the forms of the creatures it
has seen: a raven, an eagle, a hound, and a bull.

Fire Elementals

Fire elementals, or **phlegethi** (singular phlegethus, meaning
"burners"), also go by a host of other names, such as ignigena (Latin
for "fire-born"), vulcans, rolamandri, salamanders (not to be confused
with the Beasts of Virtue), and aethnici (a term also used for fiery
demons; see *Realms of Power: The Infernal*, page 67). They are uncommon
on earth, for they can only rarefy from naturally occurring sources of
flame --- usually lightning strikes, but occasionally earth-fires,
certain natural alchemical reactions, or the fire from the upper
atmosphere. Feeding a naturally lit fire with fuel does not inhibit
rarefication, and once formed, a fire elemental can consume normal fuel.
A fire elemental is often short-lived, lasting as long as it has fuel,
and prone to sudden movements of remarkable speed. Man\'s fascination
for fire is often enhanced when viewing fire elementals, and they can
easily beguile those who stare too deeply.

A phlegethus appears as a collection of flames that move contrary to
nature. Each flame is actually a tetrahedron; sometimes these pyramids
may be stretched long and thin, while at other times they may be low and
flat. The motivations and instincts of a fire elemental are basic: they
desire to burn, to consume cold and replace it with heat, and to escape
confinement.

The body of a fire elemental is composed entirely of fire. The elemental
can only cross surfaces composed of potentially flammable material; the
more flammable it is, the faster it can move. Through typical vegetation
in a temperate climate, a fire elemental can move at the speed of a
running man. It may also jump a gap of non-flammable surface (such as
bare rock) up to a width equal to its Magic Might in feet. Weapons are
meaningless to a phlegethus; they simply pass straight through the
elemental, and may catch fire. A source of water that is smaller than
the elemental\'s Size is evaporated on contact. Larger sources of water
quench the elemental\'s body, inflicting "wounds" as if it were fire
damage; typically +5 to +10 damage, but possibly more depending on the
quantity. Successful water attacks destroy any Ignem vis that might have
been present in the evaporated matter.

Sample Powers

All fire elementals have the following power:

*Burn*, 0 points, Init equal to (Qik--2), Ignem

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

Anyone touching or being touched by a fire elemental takes damage equal
to a stress die plus the entity\'s current Might pool. This is the usual
melee attack of a phlegethus. Any flammable material catches fire on
contact; typically, clothes inflict +10 damage per round on their wearer
until extinguished. Any metal coming in contact with the elemental\'s
body for more than a round heats up, causing the effects of *Heat of the
Searing Forge*, but this does not include weapons that attempt to strike
them in combat.

Cr(Re)Ig 30 (Base 5, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 requisite, +1 constant effect)

Some fire elementals have the following powers. Other powers typically
mimic Ignem spells, particularly Rego Ignem spells.

*Fascination*, 3 points, Init equal to (Qik + 4), Mentem

R: Eye, D: Sun, T: Ind

The swirling colors in the elemental\'s flames can entrance all those
who see it. Those failing an Intelligence roll against an Ease Factor of
9 will stare gape-mouthed at the elemental, unable to act. This roll may
be attempted once per round.

ReMe 15 (Base 4, +1 Eye, +2 Sun)

*Heat of the Searing Forge*, 1 point, Init equal to (Qik + 6), Ignem

R: Voice, D: Mom, T: Ind

Like the Creo Ignem spell of the same name. Note that this power works
at a distance, whereas the *Burn* power affects only items that touch
the elemental.

CrIg 10 (Base 4, +2 Voice)

A Fire Elemental

**Magic Might:** 15 (Ignem)

Recovers Might points in one quarter of the normal time, which for an
elemental means 3 weeks rather than a season. For a Might 15 elemental
this is approximately 2 Might point every 3 days.

**Characteristics:** Cun 0, Per --2, Pre +3, Com +1, Str --4, Sta 0, Dex
+5, Qik +2

**Size:** 0

**Virtues and Flaws:** Lightning Reflexes, Ways of the Forest Fire; Poor
Memory, Short Attention Span, Simple Minded.

**Personality Traits:** Forest Fire +3\*

**Combat:**

*Burn Power\*:* Init +3, Attack +12, Defense n/a, Damage +(Might Pool)

\* Includes Way of the Forest Fire

**Soak:** +4

**Wound Penalties**: --1 & 1 Might point (1--5), --3 & 3 Might points
(6--10), --5 & 5 Might points (11--15), Incapacitated & 5 Might points
(16--20), Dead & all Might points (21+)

**Abilities:** Athletics 3 (leaping between fuel sources), Brawl 3
(*Burn* Power), Charm 3 (small animals), Penetration 3 (*Fascination*
Power)

**Powers:**

*Burn*, 0 points, Init +0, Ignem: see above for details

*Fascination*, 3 points, Init +6, Mentem: see above for details

*Enliven the Gross Fire*, 6 points, Init --10, Ignem: This ritual-like
power rarefies (creates) a fire elemental from a sufficient amount of
raw elemental matter. The elemental can have any Might less than that of
the creature using this power. The elemental is automatically under the
control of the creature; this power can also be used to control
elementals which are not of the creature\'s own making, but in this case
must Penetrate the elemental\'s Might. When the creature has no further
use for the elemental, its control lapses but the elemental remains.

**Vis:** 3 pawns of Ignem, in body.

**Notes:** Born of a lightning strike hitting a magically tainted tree
(perhaps a vis source), this elemental has the frightening power to
spawn more fire elementals, which it does if fought with water.

Ghostly Warder

**Magic Might**: 10 (Mentem)

**Characteristics:** Int +1, Per +1, Pre +1, Com +1, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex
0, Qik 0

**Size:** 0 (but non-physical)

**Age:** n/a (40)

**Decrepitude:** Already dead

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** None (may take Virtues and Flaws as a grog, if
desired by the troupe.)

**Personality Traits:** Protective +3, two others chosen by the player.

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:** n/a The ghost is non-physical, and so cannot be harmed by
combat or harm others in combat.

**Abilities:** \[Area\] Lore 5 (places children get lost), Awareness 5
(where her children are), Church Lore 1 (funerals), Divine Lore 1 (after
death), Folk Ken 4 (people lying to her children), Living Language 5
(scolding), Magic Lore 2 (ghosts), Profession (housewife) 5 (cleaning)

**Powers:**

*Kinesis*, 5 points, Init 0, Terram: The ghost can move an object as if
she were still physically present. One expenditure of Might allows her
to move one object until she puts it down again. She has no combat
Abilities, so she cannot fight wielding an object as a weapon.

**Equipment:** Apparently clothing, tools, and even pots and pans, as if
she is in the process of cooking, but these are all ghostly and really
part of her.

**Vis:** None. Magi cannot render other characters\' Ghostly Warders
down for vis.

**Appearance:** An older peasant woman, rather gaunt, dressed in simple
but well-repaired clothes and carrying the tools used in some part of
daily life. This may be a distaff and spindle, or a pot, or a broom; it
changes from time to time. Note that she is invisible to characters
without an appropriate Virtue.

This Ghostly Warder (see the Magical Warder Virtue, page @@) was the
character\'s mother, aunt, or possibly grandmother. She still gives him
all the advice he received as a child, such as to wear warm clothes and
stay away from the river, but she is also quite perceptive, both about
people and about mundane events.

A Typical Giant

**Magic Might:** 12 (Corpus)

**Characteristics:** Int --3, Per +1, Pre 0, Com --3, Str +12, Sta +3,
Dex +2, Qik --2

**Size:** +5

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Tough, Warrior; Wrathful (minor), Weak-Willed

**Personality Traits:** Oafish +3

**Combat:**

*Cudgel:* Init --2, Attack +12, Defense +5, Damage +19

*Kick:* Init --3, Attack +6, Defense +1, Damage +15

*Stone:* Init --3, Attack +7, Defense +2, Damage +14

**Soak:** +9

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--10), --3 (11--20), --5 (21--30),
Incapacitated (31--40), Dead (41+)

**Fatigue Levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Abilities:** Brawl 4 (kick), Great Weapon 5 (cudgel), (Living
Language) 4 (coarse expressions), Thrown Weapon 3 (stone)

**Powers:**

None

**Equipment:** Cudgel, Partial Fur Armor

**Encumbrance:** 0

**Vis:** 3 Corpus in skull

**Appearance:** The common giant is an enormous, ugly man with bulging
eyes, an oversized, squarish head, and a shapeless gash of a mouth full
of crooked teeth. He stands about 20 feet tall and wears a crude garment
stitched together from bear skins.

These statistics are for a typical giant of the sort found throughout
the British Isles. Such giants have been known to form alliances with
hedge wizards or faeries. Unlike many magical creatures, giants need to
eat, drink, and breathe, and get old and die.

*Story Seed: A Cavernous Cage*

A giant named Morag has been driven from his home deep in the mountains
by a group of diabolists. He has wandered into the area near the
covenant and started practicing the traditional trade of his people:
robbery. His first act has been to ambush and capture a local knight,
whom he now holds hostage in a cave --- the entrance is sealed with a
boulder so heavy, even Morag needs a stout lever to dislodge it. If the
characters simply slay the giant, they may never be able to free his
captive. On the other hand, Morag craves revenge against the diabolists
and could be persuaded to join forces with the characters to destroy
them.

Sir Giles, a Ghostly Knight

**Magic Might:** 16 (Mentem)

**Characteristics:** Int --1, Per --1, Pre +1, Com 0, Str +2, Sta +1,
Dex +2, Qik +2

**Size:** 0

**Age:** n/a (30)

**Confidence Score:** 2 (6)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Knight; Puissant Single Weapon, Self-Confident;
Proud (Major); Baneful Circumstances (during the day)

**Personality Traits:** Proud +6, Belligerent +2, Brave +2

**Reputations:** Proud 3 (local)

**Combat:**

*Lance & Heater, mounted:* Init +2, Attack +17, Defense +16, Damage +7

*Lance, dismounted:* Init +3, Attack +9, Defense +7, Damage +9

*Long Sword & Heater, mounted:* Init +2, Attack +17, Defense +17, Damage
+8

*Long Sword & Heater:* Init +2, Attack +14, Defense +14, Damage +8

*Long Sword only:* Init +2, Attack +13, Defense +10, Damage +8

**Soak:** +10

**Fatigue Levels:** OK, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1(1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15), Incapacitated
(16+)

**Abilities:** (Area) Lore 3 (nobles), Animal Handling 3 (horses),
Athletics 2 (running), Awareness 3 (in battle), Brawl 2 (fist),
Concentration 1 (remaining invisible), Charm 1 (ladies), Etiquette 3
(nobles), Great Weapon 3 (long spear), Hunt 2 (deer), Intrigue 1 (noble
courts), Leadership 3 (soldiers), Ride 5 (in battle), Single Weapon 5+2
(heater shield)

**Powers:**

*Donning the Corporeal Veil,* 5 points, Init --1, Corpus: Sir Giles can
assume material form.

*Riding the Phantom Steed,* 2 points, Init 0, Animal

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

When Sir Giles takes physical form, he can also materialize his war
horse for an additional Might cost. He can dissolve the horse at will
due to the Rego requisite. Use the statistics for a destrier.

Cr(Re)An 40 (Base 15, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 Rego requisite, +1 Size)

*Invisibility,* 1 point, Init 0, Imaginem

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Group

Even in material form, Sir Giles and his horse can become invisible when
he wishes (though they can still be seen by Second Sight).

PeIm 20 (Base 4, +1 Touch, +1 Conc, +2 Group)

*Ride in Dreams,* 1 point, Init 0, Mentem

R: Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

When in spirit form, Sir Giles can enter the dreams of a sleeping person
whose name he knows, tormenting him with nightmares of a furious, dark
knight. The victim must make a Stamina roll against an Ease Factor of
Sir Giles\' Presence + Leadership or lose a Long-Term Fatigue Level.

CrMe 15 (Base 4, +1 Touch, +2 Sun)

**Equipment:** Full chain mail, lance, heater, long sword, black
destrier

**Encumbrance:** 2 (4)

**Vis:** 4 Mentem in lance

**Appearance:** Sir Giles is a Magical apparition --- a ghostly knight
in black mail, riding a fearsome black destrier. His shield and surcoat
are solid black without any heraldic device, and atop his helm is a
crest shaped like a cockerel. If he removes his helm, he appears to be a
rather handsome, well-groomed knight whose face shows an expression of
fierce pride.

Not all ghosts belong to the Magic realm; there are Infernal and Faerie
ghosts as well. Magical ghosts remain tied to the world through some
overwhelming emotion or personal need. If its connection is somehow
resolved, the ghost passes from the world, never to return.

Story Seed: Repentance

The spirit of a local knight who died in battle some years ago still
haunts his former lands, terrorizing the countryside in an attempt to
force the living to lay him to rest and end what he thinks are the
torments of Purgatory. Sir Giles believes his great sin was that he
killed another knight in tournament. His eagerness to win glory was so
great that he killed his opponent through excessive force. He thinks
that if he can ensure his victim\'s widow is well cared for, he\'ll be
able to go to Heaven. In fact, he is quite mistaken. His real sin is the
pride that drove him to kill his opponent and even now prevents him from
true repentance. Only when he comes to terms with how his pride stands
in the way of his redemption, and how it caused suffering to others,
will he truly pass on.

A Magical Wolf

**Magic Might:** 20 (Animal)

**Characteristics:** Int 0, Per +3, Pre +1, Com +1, Str +2, Sta +2, Dex
+2, Qik +2

**Size:** --1

**Age:** n/a

**Decrepitude:** n/a

**Virtues and Flaws:** None

**Personality Traits:** Leader +3, Loyal +2

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:** Bite: Init +12, Attack +10, Defense +14, Damage +9

**Soak:** +7

**Fatigue levels:** n/a The magical wolf is tireless.

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--4), --3 (5--8), --5 (9--12), Incapacitated
(13--16)

**Abilities:** \[Area\] Lore 6 (game trails), Brawl 6 (biting), Hunt 7
(in a pack), Living Language 5 (hunting terminology). Survival 6
(forests)

**Powers:**

*Pack of One,* 2 points, Init +10, Animal: The wolf can create five
duplicates of himself, who can then fight as a trained group. For these
purposes, treat the wolf as having a Leadership score of 5, so that he
can get the full +15 group bonus to his attacks. The power lasts until
the pack brings down its opponent, which may be a group, or disengages
from the fight. As the pack is really all one creature, the nomination
of a vanguard is arbitrary. Further, the group does not need to
disengage and reform when the vanguard is killed; it can seamlessly
transfer the role to another wolf. Finally, the wolf only dies if all
the copies are killed. When the duplicates vanish, the least wounded
wolf remains.

*Terrifying Howl,* 4 points, Init +0, Mentem: Anyone who hears the
wolf\'s howl is struck with fear of the wolf and of wilderness places
away from the haunts of men. Someone already in a house will merely not
want to leave. Overcoming this fear completely requires a Brave roll
against an Ease Factor of 12. Acting sensibly while responding to it,
such as heading back to the village carefully, requires a Brave roll
against an Ease Factor of 6. Those who fail the easier roll simply flee
in panic.

*Wolf Lord,* 0 points, constant, Animal: Any wolf the magical wolf
strikes in deadly combat dies instantly. In addition, the magical wolf
can make mundane wolves follow his instructions even when he is not
around, as long as the instructions are quite simple.

**Equipment:** None. Magical though he is, he is still a wolf.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Vis:** 4 pawns of Animal, in head.

**Appearance:** A gray male wolf, slightly larger than normal, but only
slightly, and looking extremely healthy. His eyes, in particular,
sparkle more brightly than should be possible.

The magical wolf does not care for such human niceties as names, and
isn\'t particularly interested in human beings. Instead, he watches over
all the wolves in his range, doing what he can to ensure their safety,
health, and food supply. Sometimes, this means hunting wolves down
himself, to keep population down, and in that case he removes the weak
from the packs.

While he has no interest in human beings, he does see that they are
important, and might be willing to negotiate with a village. On the
other hand, he might decide to drive them out. This magical wolf has the
same reactions to The Gift as a mundane animal, although other magical
wolves may not.

Mount Etna

A powerful and violent spirit of fire, Adranus, slumbers beneath a
mountain on the Mediterranean island of Sicily. It has developed an
antipathy towards the local peoples, since they long ago ceased
worshipping it as a god. Nevertheless, it is satisfied when mortals stay
away from its slopes and live in a state of respectful fear, but should
they become too bold, disrespectful, or forgetful, the genius loci will
become irritated and its sleep will be disturbed. Its wrath gradually
builds up until the need to vent its fury is overwhelming, at which
point the volcano erupts with spectacular and devastating force. Those
few who venture onto the blasted and rocky slopes of the mountain have
been known to go insane.

In ancient times, Adranus was worshiped by the primitive inhabitants of
Sicily as a god of fire. When the Romans rose to prominence it was cast
out by Vulcan, their god of fire and forge, but has since returned, and
wreaks occasional and spectacular violent retribution on those who no
longer either honor or fear it. A gateway to the Underworld was believed
by the ancients to be situated beneath Etna. When using the
Manifestation power, Adranus usually possesses one or more Sicilian
eagles, the only creatures who will brave the mountain\'s heights. The
volcano last erupted in 1194, and, if your saga follows real history,
will next erupt in 1222.

**Story Seed**: **Fire and Fury**

Maria, a young woman living in a village not far from the volcano, feels
a strange empathy for fire, and she can predict the activity of the
volcano through her dreams (she has the Visions Flaw). Her pregnant
mother was the only survivor when the volcano destroyed the village
during its last eruption a generation ago --- only she heeded the
warnings and made a miraculous escape. Maria, born with the same talent
as her mother, makes dire predictions of an imminent eruption and begs
the villagers to assuage the fire spirit to prevent it. They, however,
scoff at her heathen mumblings, and so it looks as if the fire spirit
will indeed return with a vengeance.

Adranus, the Spirit of Mount Etna

**Magic Might:** 50 (Ignem)

**Characteristics:** Int +3, Per +3, Pre +2, Com +2, Str +3, Sta +2, Dex
--1, Qik --2

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3 points)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Ways of the Mountains; Improved Characteristics
x5; Fury, Wrathful

**Personality Traits:** Wrathful +6, Slumbering +3

**Reputations:** Bringer of Death and Destruction 5 (Local)

**Abilities:** Sicily Lore 6 (mountains), Magic Lore 8 (underworld)

**Powers:**

*Crafter of Fire*, variable points, Init --2 -- Might cost, Ignem:
Duplicates any non-Ritual Creo Ignem or Rego Ignem spell no greater than
50th level at a cost of 1 Might point per magnitude of the effect.

*Crafter of Earth*, variable points, Init --2 -- Might cost, Terram:
Duplicates any non-Ritual Creo Terram or Rego Terram spell no greater
than 50th level at a cost of 1 Might point per magnitude of the effect.

*Grant Visions*, 5 points, Init --12, Vim: The target gains the Visions
Flaw. Adranus can grant the Flaw temporarily, in which case it does not
recover the Might Points spent until it withdraws the Flaw, or
permanently, in which case its Might Score is reduced by 5.

*Grant Simple-Minded*, 5 points, Init --12, Vim: The target gains the
Simple-Minded Flaw. Adranus can grant the Flaw temporarily, in which
case it does not recover the Might Points spent until it withdraws the
Flaw, or permanently, in which case its Might Score is reduced by 5.

*Grant Wrathful*, 5 points, Init --12, Vim: The target gains the
Wrathful Flaw. Adranus can grant the Flaw temporarily, in which case it
does not recover the Might Points spent until it withdraws the Flaw, or
permanently, in which case its Might Score is reduced by 5.

*Hibernation*, 15 points, Init --32, Vim: The spirit remains completely
inactive for a year (spending no other Might points); the 15 points
spent on this power are saved and added to the Might Pool for the first
year out of hibernation. In this fashion, the Might Pool may exceed the
permanent Might score (50). Using this power, the volcano can save up
Might points over many years in succession and have a great amount to
spend in the single year in which it awakens.

*Manifestation*, 4 or more points, Init equal to (Qik -- Might points
spent), Animal

R: Touch, D: Conc, T: Ind or Group

Manifests the spirit\'s consciousness among animals it touches,
temporarily granting them a Might score equal to the Might points spent,
and controlling their actions. It is a Rego Herbam effect of Level 20 to
control a plant that is a pace in diameter (costing 4 Might points), and
a Rego Animal of Level 25 to control a single creature of Size +1
(costing 5 Might points). For an extra 2 Might points, a group of ten
standard creatures (or the equivalent mass) can be controlled. For each
additional 2 Might points spent, the mass of creatures controlled is
multiplied by 10. The spirit cannot spend more Might points on this
power than the magnitude of its Magic Might. Humans and other sentient
beings cannot be controlled by this power. Adranus is considered to be
touching any animal on the mountain.

ReHe 20 or more (Base 10, +1 Touch, +1 Conc) or ReAn 25 or more (Base
15, +1 Touch, +1 Conc)

*Master of Earth*, variable points, Init --2 -- Might cost, Terram:
Duplicates any non-Ritual Muto Terram or Perdo Terram spell no greater
than 50th level at a cost of 1 Might point per magnitude of the effect.

*Presence*, 0 points, constant, Imaginem

R: Arc, D: Sun, T: Ind

Grants awareness of everything that happens within the bounds of Mount
Etna. In essence, the spirit is coterminous with its associated
landscape feature, so it is present simultaneously everywhere within its
boundaries. The area controlled by the spirit can produce a yearly
harvest of 5 pawns of Ignem vis, which manifests as physical objects
within the controlled region. Harvesting this vis does not erode the
spirit\'s Might.

InIm 30 (Base 2, +4 Arc, +2 Sun, +1 constant effect, +1 non-Hermetic
effects)

*Regio*, 15 points, Init --32, Vim: By permanently spending Might, the
spirit can add levels to the regio around the volcano\'s crater.

*Ruler of Lava*, variable points, Init --2 -- Might cost, Terram:
Duplicates any non-Ritual spell pertaining to lava no greater than 50th
level, at a cost of 1 Might point per magnitude of the effect.

*Ruler of Smoke*, variable points, Init --2 -- Might cost, Auram:
Duplicates any non-Ritual spell pertaining to smoke no greater than 50th
level, at a cost of 1 Might point per magnitude of the effect.

**Vis:** 10 pawns of Ignem vis; 5 pawns per year can also be harvested
from the crater at the volcano\'s summit.

**Appearance**: Mount Etna is a conical and blasted peak that rises ten
thousand feet above the eastern end of the island of Sicily.

Revenants, the Walking Dead

*It was not long before men became aware that Glam was not easy in his
grave. Many men suffered severe injuries; some who saw him were struck
senseless and some lost their wits. Soon ... men began to think they saw
him about their houses. The panic was great and many left the
neighborhood. Next he began to ride on the house-tops by night, and
nearly broke them to pieces. Almost night and day he walked, and people
would scarcely venture up the valley, however pressing their business.
The district was in a grievous condition.*

*--- The Saga of Grettir the Strong*

While ghosts are the disembodied spirits of the dead, medieval stories
also tell of restless dead who still occupy their material bodies. These
are **revenants** or \"the walking dead,\" which differ from ghosts in
that their only form is an animate, material corpse.

Although a revenant is bound to a physical body, its animating force is
a spirit. Some magi consider them to be a special sub-class of ghosts.
Like ghosts, Magical revenants are connected to the living world through
some overwhelming personal need. Their motivations and personalities are
as varied as those of ghosts.

The physical statistics of a revenant are also usable for corpses that
have been animated by spells such as *The Walking Corpse*. Such
automatons are not supernatural beings and have no Might score (and
hence no Magic Resistance).

Fighting the Walking Dead

Magic can affect either a revenant\'s body (through the Form of Corpus)
or the animating spirit (usually through Mentem or Vim). Destruction of
the body does not harm the spirit, though the spirit may lack any power
to affect the physical world once its body is destroyed.

*Lay to Rest the Haunting Spirit* can affect the animating spirit,
provided the spirit is subject to the Form of Mentem. Magic can force
the spirit out of the body, and if this happens (or if the body is
destroyed) the spirit cannot re-enter the corpse or possess a new one
unless it has specific powers allowing it to do so.

Revenants are difficult to harm with weapons. In particular, they cannot
be Incapacitated; treat Incapacitating wounds as Heavy wounds instead.

Perdo Corpus spells designed to target the living often have no effect
on revenants, as their bodies are already dead. Spells that specifically
break bones or destroy limbs do not hinder them as much as they do
living people, but may cause Wound Penalties at the storyguide\'s
discretion. For example, a broken leg might affect a revenant as if it
were a Light wound. Perdo Corpus spells can, of course, be designed
specifically to target the unquiet dead.

Different legends speak of special methods by which heroes can destroy
the walking dead. In certain Icelandic sagas, a *draug* (revenant) could
be destroyed by cutting off its head and placing it between its thighs.
In a tale from Yorkshire, revenants could be destroyed by driving stakes
through their hearts. A character who knows the correct method should
make a regular melee attack. If the attack would have caused an
Incapacitating or fatal wound against a Soak of +3, and if the attack
was with the correct weapon (for instance, a wooden stake if that is the
way to destroy this particular revenant), then the revenant\'s animating
spirit is destroyed and any vis in the corpse is left behind. Learning
the method for destroying a revenant may require a story, or if the
storyguide prefers she can assign it an Ease Factor of 9 on an
Intelligence + Magic Lore roll.

Medieval tales and illustrations depict both corpse-like walking dead
and animated skeletons. The word \"zombie\" is of New World (Haitian)
origin and would not be used by characters in Mythic Europe.

Option: Resistance to Piercing Weapons

Piercing weapons such as spears and arrows are effective against living
beings, but potentially less so against the walking dead. Such weapons
are unlikely to break bones or hack off limbs. The troupe may wish to
grant revenants an additional +10 Soak bonus against such weapons, or
simply rule them totally ineffective.

**Ars Magica** Fifth Edition does not formally differentiate weapons
into categories such as \"piercing,\" so if the troupe adopts this
option, they will sometimes have to exercise judgment about whether a
weapon counts as a piercing weapon.

Animating Corpses with Magic

Wizards can animate corpses using Rego Corpus spells (or certain
non-Hermetic powers). Such corpses use the same statistics as a
revenant, with the following changes:

> It does not suffer from fatigue and has the Soak listed in the
> statistics, but no powers of its own
>
> A corpse animated by a spell has no Might score or Confidence score.
> Its Brawl skill is nominally 3, though as an optional rule the troupe
> may wish to assign a Brawl score equal to the caster\'s Finesse.
>
> A corpse animated by demonic possession or a Magic spirit\'s
> Manifestation power has a Might score equal to the cost of that power.
> It uses the possessing spirit\'s Confidence score, if any. The
> controlling spirit may be able to use its powers through the possessed
> corpse (depending on the description of the possessing power).

*Realms of Power: The Infernal* includes rules for demons who can
animate corpses on page 75.

Regardless of how the corpse is animated, its unarmed attacks can be
blocked by Magic Resistance.

Revenant, Corpse-Like Form

**Magic Might**: 9 (Corpus)

**Characteristics:** Int --2, Per --2, Pre 0, Com --2, Str +3, Sta +3,
Dex +1, Qik 0

**Size:** 0

**Confidence Score:** 1(3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Baneful Circumstances (in daylight)

**Personality Traits:** Vengeful +6

**Combat:**

*Fist*: Init 0, Attack +7, Defense +4, Damage +5

**Soak**: +11

**Wound Penalties:** --1(1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15), --5 (16--20),
Destroyed (21+)

**Abilities:** Brawl 3 (fist)

**Powers:**

*Breath of Corruption*, 1 point, Init +2, Auram

R: Special, D: Mom, T: Ind

The walking corpse can exhale foul humors, infecting a person within 2
paces with a disease (Ease Factor 9, effect as a Medium wound).

CrAu 20 (Base 10, +2 Range equivalent to Voice)

*Rise from the Grave*, 1 point, Init --1, Terram

R: Touch, D: Diameter, T: Part

The revenant can cause the earth over its grave to open for one Diameter
so it may enter or leave. The ground then seals, leaving no trace of
disturbance.

ReTe 5 (Base 2, +1 Touch, +1 Diameter, +1 Part)

**Equipment:** Tattered burial shroud; the revenant\'s dead, unfeeling
fist strikes as if it were a bludgeon (see page @@)

**Vis:** 2 Corpus in eyes (1 per eye)

**Appearance:** A shriveled, leathery corpse; its eyes blaze with
unnatural fury.

Revenant, Skeletal Form

**Magic Might:** 6 (Corpus)

**Characteristics:** Cun --2, Per --2, Pre 0, Com --2, Str 0, Sta +3,
Dex +2, Qik +1

**Size:** --2

**Virtues and Flaws:** Baneful Circumstances (in daylight), Weak
Characteristics (x2)

**Personality Traits:** Vengeful +3

**Combat:**

*Bony Claws:* Init +2, Attack +8, Defense +8, Damage +2

**Soak:** +9

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--3), --3 (4--6), --5 (7--9), --5 (10--12),
Destroyed (13+)

**Abilities:** Brawl 3 (claws)

**Powers:**

*Rise from the Grave*, 2 points, Init +2, Terram

R: Touch, D: Diameter, T: Part

The skeleton can cause the earth over its grave to open for one Diameter
so it may enter or leave. The earth then seals, leaving no trace of
disturbance.

ReTe 10 (Base 3, +1 Touch, +1 Diameter, +1 Part)

**Equipment:** Tattered burial shroud

**Vis:** 1 Corpus in skull

**Appearance:** A leering skeleton whose bony fingers are as sharp as
claws.

A human skeleton weighs much less than a living person, so an animate
skeleton\'s Size is --2.

Scitalis

**Magic Might:** 5 (Animal)

**Characteristics:** Cun +1, Per +2, Pre +4, Com --3, Str --2, Sta +2,
Dex 0, Qik --2

**Size:** --2

**Virtues and Flaws:** Great Presence; Poor Quickness, Weak
Characteristics

**Personality Traits:** Lethargic +2, Territorial +2

**Combat:**

*Fangs:* Init --2, Attack +7, Defense +3, Damage --1

**Soak:** +4

**Fatigue Levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--3), --3 (4--6), --5 (7--9), Incapacitated
(10--12), Dead (13+)

**Abilities:** Brawl 3 (fangs), Ignem Resistance 3 (cold), Survival 2
(winter)

**Powers:**

*Dazzling Appearance*, 0 points, Init --3, Mentem or Animal

R:Per, D: Conc, T: Spectacle

The scitalis can use its wondrous colors and appearance to stupefy those
who look at it. Victims stand in slack-jawed amazement, unable to move,
speak, or act, for as long as the scitalis concentrates. It uses this
power to capture its prey, for it is a slow-moving creature.

ReMe(An) 45 (Base 15, +1 Conc, +4 Spectacle, +1 Animal requisite)

*Venom*, 0 points, Init n/a, Aquam

R:Touch, D: Sun, T: Ind

The scitalis\' fangs drip a venom that causes a Medium Wound (if it
penetrates Magic Resistance) unless its victim can make a Stamina roll
against an Ease Factor of 9.

CrAq 30 (Base 10, +1 Touch, +2 Sun, +1 continuous effect)

**Vis:** 1 Imaginem in skin

**Appearance:** The scitalis is a large snake, about six feet long and
as thick as a man\'s arm. Its scales are patterned in a variety of
spectacular colors.

The scitalis is a slow-moving serpent that relies on its marvelous
appearance to stun its prey. The scitalis usually hunts by hiding near a
water source or game trail. It typically preys on small animals, but has
been known to attack humans if it feels threatened. Unlike mundane
snakes, the blood of the scitalis is hot, enabling the serpent to remain
active throughout the winter months.

*Story Seed: A Scintillating Serpent*

En route to visit an important magus or noble, the characters stumble
upon a scitalis, which tries to bite them as they stand spellbound.
Little do they know that the scitalis was a warning from benevolent
forces, as it foreshadows their upcoming visit: when they arrive at
their destination, their host tries to impress them with lavish gifts
and hospitality, while secretly planning to take advantage of them.

Stag of Virtue

**Magic Might:** 17 (Animal)

**Characteristics:** Cun --2, Per +2, Pre +2, Com --3, Str +4, Sta +3,
Dex +1, Qik +2

**Size:** +2

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Ways of the Forest; Essential Virtue (healthy,
minor), Ferocity (when at bay), Great Quickness, Lesser Immunity
(fevers), Long-Winded, Puissant Athletics; Hatred (of serpents, major);
Higher Purpose (protect its herd), Restricted Power (x2)

**Personality Traits:** Stag\* +3, Noble +3, Healthy (Stamina) +3, Brave
+2

**Reputations:** Noble 2 (local)

**Combat:**

*Antlers:* Init +4, Attack +10, Defense +10, Damage +7

*Hooves:* Init +4, Attack +8, Defense +9, Damage +5

**Soak:** +7

**Fatigue Levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--7), --3 (8--14), --5 (15--21),
Incapacitated (22--28), Dead (29+)

**Abilities:** Athletics 8+2 (sprinting), Awareness 5 (hunters), Brawl 5
(antlers), Stealth 3 (hiding in undergrowth), Survival 4 (forests)

**Powers:**

*Healing*, 3 points, Init --8, Animal

R: Per, D: Mom, T: Ind

The stag can heal one of its own Heavy or lesser wounds. This is a
Restricted Power: the stag must eat the herb dittany to activate it.

CrAn 25 (Base effect)

*Delay the Serpent\'s Venom*, 0 points, Init n/a, Aquam

R: Per, D: Sun, T: Ind

The Stag of Virtue is magically warded against poison. Any poison
introduced into the Stag\'s body takes no effect until the next sunrise
or sunset (whichever comes first). This power activates whenever such a
poison is introduced, and thus has an Intellego requisite.

Re(In)Aq 20 (Base 5, +2 Sun, +1 Intellego requisite)

*Alleviate the Serpent\'s Bite,* 1 point, Init +1, Aquam

R: Per, D: Mom, T: Ind

A Stag of Virtue can permanently neutralize any poison already inside
its body. This is a Restricted Power, which the Stag must drink water to
activate.

PeAq 15 (Base 15)

**Vis:** 3 Creo in right antler.

\...\[W\]hen the stag knows where the serpent is, he goes and fills his
mouth with water and spits it down where the serpent is and draws him
out \... and stamps him underfoot and thus kills him.

--- Pierre de Beauvais

A Stag of Virtue is a great enemy of serpents and kills them whenever it
can. It does this by filling its mouth with water and spitting it down
the serpent\'s hole; when the serpent emerges to escape drowning, the
Stag of Virtue tramples it to death.

A Stag of Virtue enjoys vigorous health and can live a very long time
(in fact, like other Beasts of Virtue, it can live forever). To keep
itself youthful and healthy, this stag swallows a live, venomous
serpent. Then it drinks a large quantity of water to neutralize the
venom. After this process, its antlers fall off and its vigor is
restored. Hermetic experts concur that the Stag of Virtue actually
consumes Magical serpents for this process and that it becomes weak and
looks aged when it cannot find snakes to eat (such as during the
winter). The Stag of Virtue lives only in places where Magical snakes
can be found.

The right antler of a Stag of Virtue has healing powers and is greatly
sought by hedge wizards and magi alike. The stag always buries its
antlers after shedding them. Anyone who consumes the flesh of a Stag of
Virtue gains a Lesser Immunity to fevers for Moon duration. The stag
itself is immune to fevers and the venison transfers this immunity
through the Law of Contagion.

*Story Seed: A Magical Quarry*

The characters need the healing powers in the antler of a Stag of Virtue
to heal a sick friend. They can either hunt the stag or try to find one
of its buried antlers. In many parts of Mythic Europe, hunting large
game is a privilege reserved for the nobility. The characters may be
accused of poaching, or they may find that the local noble is hunting
the Stag of Virtue for himself. Because the Stag has the Ways of the
Forest Virtue and an impressive Athletics score, it can be a difficult
quarry.

Stellatus, the Dragon

**Magic Might:** 50 (Ignem)

**Characteristics:** Int +4, Per +4, Pre +7, Com +2, Str +8, Sta +8, Dex
+3, Qik 0

**Size:** +8

**Age:** n/a

**Decrepitude:** n/a

**Confidence Score:** 3 (12)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Second Sight

**Personality Traits:** Proud +3

**Reputations:** The Powerful Dragon who Lives in the Mountains (local)
5

**Combat:** Claws: Init +3, Attack +22, Defense +18, Damage +20

**Soak:** +20

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0/0/0/0/0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--13), --3 (14--26), --5 (27--39),
Incapacitated (40--52)

**Abilities:** \[Area\] Lore 5 (history), Awareness 8 (human beings),
Brawl 7 (claws), Divine Lore 1 (saints), Faerie Lore 2 (knights), Folk
Ken 2 (scholars), Guile 4 (keeping secrets), Infernal Lore 0 (1)
(undead), Magic Lore 8 (dragons), Order of Hermes Lore 1 (Tytalus),
Second Sight 8 (magical invisibility)

**Powers:**

*Human Form:* 1 point, Init 0, Corpus: The dragon can assume the form of
a human being. This is always the same form, a man with dark hair and
eyes, in the prime of life. The transformation lasts until he eats or
drinks, or until Stellatus uses the same power again to change back. The
dragon has all his powers in human form, and the same Characteristics,
but he is much weaker in combat and thus changes back if he needs to
fight.

*Instill Loyalty,* 5 points, Init 0, Mentem: Stellatus can make any
individual whom he can see totally loyal. This does not remove free
will, but the victim is completely loyal to the dragon, and this loyalty
lasts as long as Stellatus is alive.

*Fiery Breath,* 1 point, Init +5, Ignem: Stellatus can breathe fire. The
fire extends in a cone from his mouth, out to a distance of 20 paces,
where it is 20 paces across. The fire has an intensity of +15. Dodging
it is a Qik + Athletics roll against an Ease Factor of 9. A failure
means that the character is engulfed in the flames, taking +45 damage, a
success by 3 points or less means that a limb is covered, for +30
damage, a success by 4 to 6 points (that is, success against Ease Factor
12) means that the character is only brushed by the flames, for +15
damage, while success by 7 points or more (that is, success against Ease
Factor 15) means that the character dodges out of the fire entirely.

*Master of Fire,* 1 or more Might Points, Init 0, Ignem: Stellatus can
control fire. He can duplicate any Hermetic Rego Ignem spell of fourth
magnitude or less at the cost of 1 Might point. For every additional
Might point he spends, the level of the spell increases by one
magnitude.

**Equipment:** Ancient treasure is piled high in his lair.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Vis:** 5 pawns of Ignem vis in each eye.

**Appearance:** An enormous lizard with great wings, covered in scales
of red so dark as to be almost black. His eyes are lit from within by a
smoldering orange glow. Although he is a little on the small side for a
dragon, he is larger than most houses.

Stellatus is an ancient dragon who has laired under the same mountain
range for centuries. Most of the time he lies quietly in his lair,
contemplating his treasure, or travels the area around in human form (he
can go for weeks without eating or drinking). Every couple of centuries,
he erupts in draconic form to carry out some plan or seize some item,
and every decade or so some would-be hero disturbs him.

The dragon is aware of The Gift, but it inspires him with curiosity,
making him less likely to simply kill magi who enter his lair. A Tytalus
maga did spend some time challenging the dragon in various ways, and
although Stellatus eventually killed her by rigging an entirely mundane
rock-fall trap, he quite enjoyed the experience. He regards himself as
superior to all Hermetic magi, and is firmly convinced that he is immune
to their magic. With a Magic Resistance of 50, this is almost, but not
quite, true.

Zwergenstimme

**Magic Might:** 15 (Imaginem)

**Characteristics:** Int 0, Per 0, Pre --1, Com +4, Str 0, Sta --1, Dex
0, Qik +3

**Virtues and Flaws:** Great Communication, Improved Characteristics,
Sharp Ears

**Personality Traits:** Mischievous +3, Echo +3\*

**Reputations:** Murderous 1 (Local)

**Combat:**

*Thrown Rock:* Init +3, Attack +4, Defense n/a Damage +5

**Abilities:** Awareness 4 (sounds), Folk Ken 1 (fear), Guile 1
(mimicry), Music 2 (echoes), Thrown Weapon 4 (rocks)

**Powers:**

*Master of Sound*, variable points, Init +5 -- Might cost, Imaginem: The
spirit can duplicate any non-Ritual spell involving sound up to Level
15, at a cost of 1 Might Point per magnitude of effect. (Te)Im15

*Bring Down the Roof*, 2 points, Init +3, Terram: The Zwergenstimme can
cause the roof of a cave to collapse, crushing any within it. This
causes +20 damage, and seals the exit from the cave. PeTe 20 (base 3, +1
Touch, +2 Room, +2 Size)

*Presence*, 0 points, constant, Imaginem

Grants awareness of everything that happens within the bounds of a
specific domain chosen by the spirit. In essence, the spirit is
coterminous with its associated landscape feature, so it is present
simultaneously everywhere within its boundaries. The area controlled by
the spirit can produce a yearly harvest of 2 pawns of vis of an
appropriate Form, which manifests as physical objects within the
controlled region. Harvesting this vis does not erode the spirit\'s
Might. The echo spirit can haunt a series of caves (constituting a
Structure).

*Ghost Touch*, variable cost, Init +2, Terram: The spirit can hurl rocks
at enemies. It uses the combat scores listed above, but each attack
costs 1 Might point.

**Vis:** 3 pawns of Imaginem, as an immaterial echo

**Appearance**: An echo. This spirit appears only as auditory species to
those with Second Sight

This spirit of an echo lurks in caves or ravines. Its name literally
means \"dwarf voice\" in German, and these spirits have been known to
mislead lost humans by "playing" with them. The spirit certainly has no
intent to harm; it doesn\'t even understand what harm is.

Creatures of Faerie

Faeries essentially bound to stories, and their roles in those stories.
They are made up of stray matter held together with mystical rules.
Despite this, their physical attacks are not blocked by Magic
Resistance, including the Parma Magica.

Faeries cannot break their roles. They would prefer to die, because
death is rarely permanent for faeries.

Faeries have Pretenses instead of Abilities. Most faeries cannot learn,
so they use faerie glamour to mimic human Abilities. Skill in mimicking
a particular Ability is called Pretense. This is not quite the same as
an Ability, and a skilled character, with a score of 5 or more, may be
able to tell. For example, a character with a Single Weapon Ability of 5
or more, when facing a faerie, may make a Perception + Awareness roll
against an Ease Factor of 12 -- the Ability score the faerie is
pretending to have. If successful, the character realizes that the
faerie\'s weapon does not travel through all the space between its
strikes and blocks, sometimes it simply appears in the locations where
its movements end.

In most scenarios, the difference between abilities and pretenses is
insignificant. A faerie knight trying to kill a character is still
dangerous regardless of whether he is using his sword the way a human
would. In some scenarios, spotting that a character is using pretense is
a way of detecting their faerie nature.

New Virtues and Flaws

Faeries have an innate ability to regenerate damage, retaining only
those superficial injuries necessary to make their roles believable.
They never suffer fatigue, although they may pretend to. They are
unencumbered by the normal accoutrements of the role they are playing,
which are formed from the glamour of the faerie, and increase its Touch
range.

**Cognizance** is the degree to which a faerie knows it is a faerie, and
what that means about its relationship to stories. Most have the
Narrowly Cognizant Free Virtue. This means they are aware of their
faerie nature in a limited way. They try to play a role accurately, and
cannot break role even if it leads to their deaths. There are some
faeries, with the Highly Cognizant Virtue, who are able to adapt their
roles to feed on human emotional energy. These are the most dangerous
faeries, because they are able to change their roles. Incognizant
faeries, conversely, do not even know they are faeries: they follow
their roles because they have no potential to understand any other
option.

**Faerie Sight** is the ability to read glamour, the magical rules from
which faeries are constructed. Assume that characters with Faerie Sight
can see magical things, and tell what other faeries want, just by
looking at them.

**Faerie Speech** allows faeries to converse in the language of their
audience. They can speak any language that someone has used to speak to
them, and this effect does not need to Penetrate because it only affects
the faerie.

A **Traditional Ward** is a taboo: the faerie may not touch a thing
protected by the ward with its glamour. The faerie is likely
uncomfortable in the presence of the ward, but is not compelled to flee.
The faerie cannot regenerate Might points in the presence of a
traditional ward. If forced to touch the ward the glamour holding the
faerie\'s body together begins to decay. The damage to the faerie\'s
body can be simulated with the Heat and Corrosion rules. Assume that the
object acts as a source of damage with an intensity of +6.

A **Sovereign Ward** is a powerful taboo. A faerie cannot hurt someone
carrying that faerie\'s sovereign ward. This includes indirect harm like
burning down the building the warded person is in, or poisoning the well
at which they are likely to drink. Direct contact with a sovereign ward
destroys the body of a faerie, removing it from the scenario.

*Realms of Power: Faerie* contains much more detail on faeries and their
realms, along with many more examples of faerie creatures.

Faerie Hounds

**Faerie Might:** 5 (Animal)

**Characteristics:** Cun 0, Per +2, Pre --4, Com 0, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex
+1, Qik +2

**Size:** +1

**Virtues and Flaws**: Faerie Sight, Improved Characteristics, Sharp
Ears, Large; Incognizant, Reckless, Traditional Wards (varies)

**Personality Traits:** Loyal +3, Reckless +3, Brave +2

**Combat:**

Bite: (small teeth): Init +2, Attack +10, Defense +9, Damage +1\*

\*In some cases faerie hounds have the Power Damaging Effect, which adds
+5 to the damage score of their bite. This is usually visually obvious,
for example their spittle ignites tiny flames on the ground, or their
breath puffs like smoke because their teeth freeze like ice.

**Soak:** +2

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--6), --3 (7--12), --5 (13--18),
Incapacitated (19--24), Dead (25+)

**Pretenses:** Athletics 5 (distance running), Awareness 6 (keeping
watch), Brawl 5 (bite), Hunt 6 (track by scent)

**Powers:**

The powers below are commonly found in Faerie Hounds, but it is rare for
a single hound to have more than two of them.

*Damaging Effect:* 2 points: Init 0, Varies: Causes all of the faerie\'s
weapons, which are part of its glamor, to take on a more deadly aspect
for two minutes. The danger of the aspect varies according to the motif
usual for the faerie, but always increases the weapon\'s Damage by +5.

*Enthralling Sound:* 3 points, Init --2, Mentem: Used to cause terror
and panic with its howl. This power also increases the intensity of an
emotion that already exists. A stress roll with an appropriate
Personality trait against an Ease Factor of 9 allows a victim to
overcome this power\'s effect.

*Enthrallment:* 4 points, Init --2, Mentem: Allows the faerie to take
complete control of a single human\'s mind for a day, by making eye
contact.

*Fearful Flaming Eyes:* 2 points, Init --2, Corpus: Completely paralyzes
a human who makes eye contact with the faerie.

*Hound:* 2 points, Init 0, Corpus: Allows the faerie to know the
direction and distance to its human quarry.

*Flight:* 0 points, constant +2, Animal: The character is capable of
flight. The character may use the Athletics skill to simulate difficult
maneuvers, but may not engage in combat while flying incredibly swiftly.
The faerie may not fly when heavily encumbered, or with a passenger of
its Size or more, unless assisted by another faerie that shares the
load.

**Vis:** 1 pawn Animal, dog corpse

**Appearance:** Faerie hounds are usually of chunky, hunting breeds.
Many have shining eyes, and almost all have black, white or green fur.
These statistics also suit the hunting hounds of the courtly fae. This
type of faerie hound often has a white coat, red ears and blue eyes.

Huge faerie dogs haunt the roads of much of Mythic Europe. They terrify,
and sometimes kill, travelers. Some can run rapidly, and others run upon
their hindlimbs when chasing humans, to have their teeth closer to the
victim\'s throat.

**Variants:**

In part of France, this role is filled by a terrifying goat.

**Aufhocker,** found in German-speaking areas, acts as a kelpie, and
uses a power to cling to foes while goring them so that his weight adds
6 to their combat Load.

**Kludie,** from Belgium, is the most powerful variant of this beast. It
can take monstrously-large versions of the forms of dog, cat, bat, horse
or frog. It walks on its back legs, with a dancing movement as it
sprints toward its victim. It is preceded by supernatural blue flames.
Kludie knows the trick of bouncing on the back of his quarry and using a
power to drag his prey down. He also does the kelpie trick, dunking or
drowning those who mount him in horse form.

Faerie Knight

**Faerie Might:** 10 (Corpus or Terram)

**Characteristics:** Int 0, Per 0, Pre --2, Com --2, Str +3, Sta +2, Dex
+2, Qik +1

**Size:** +1

**Virtues and Flaws:** Faerie Sight, Faerie Speech, Large, Narrowly
Cognizant, Observant; Sovereign Ward (varies), Vow (Chivalrous conduct),
Oath of Fealty, Overconfident.

**Personality Traits:** Arrogant +3, Courteous +3

**Combat:**

Brawl (gauntlet): Init +1, Attack +6, Defense +6, Damage +5

Long Sword and Heater Shield\*: Init +3, Attack +10, Defense +9, Damage
+9

Mace and Heater shield\*: Init +2, Attack +9, Defense +8, Damage +11

Lance and Heater Shield (mounted)\*: Init +3, Attack +10, Defense +8,
Damage +8

Does not include +3 to Attack and Defense for being mounted.

**Soak:** +9\*

Faerie metal scale, made of glamor using the Shift Human Shapes Power.

**Wound Penaltie**s: --1 (1--6), --3 (7--12), --5 (13--18),
Incapacitated (19--25), Dead (26+)

**Pretenses:** Awareness 1 (enemies), Brawl 3\* (knights), Carouse 3
(feasts), Charm 1 (ladies), Etiquette 3 (chivalrous combat), Faerie
Speech 5 (boasting), Hunt 2 (humans), Leadership 2 (guards), Ride 3
(horses), Single Weapon 4\* (varies).

\*Many knights have far higher scores than this. These statistics are
correct for faeries that plan to improve their Pretenses by losing to a
character, then mirroring his experience gain for the season.

**Powers:**

*Damaging Effect:* 1 point, Init --4, as per motif of court. Causes all
of the faerie\'s weapons, which are part of its glamor, to take on a
more deadly aspect for two minutes. The danger of the aspect varies
according to the motif usual for the faerie, but always increases the
weapon\'s Damage by +5.

*Flight,* 2 points, constant, Corpus: The character is capable of
flight. The character may use the Athletics skill to simulate difficult
maneuvers, but may not engage in combat while flying incredibly swiftly.
The faerie may not fly when heavily encumbered, or with a passenger of
its Size or more, unless assisted by another faerie that shares the
load.

*Shift Human Shapes:* 1 point, Init 0, Corpus. Allows the knight, who is
usually armored to demonstrate his role, to remove the armor simply by
thinking about it.

**Equipment:** Arms and armor. Has a faerie horse constructed of the
knight\'s own glamor, so it flies when the knight does, and shares the
knight\'s Magic Resistance.

**Vis**: 2 pawns, often rusty pieces of armor that the knight has poured
its glamor into.

**Appearance:** A knight clad in silver leaves of metal, astride a fine
horse. These knights often display the motif of their court on their
surcoat, shield and pavilion.

These faeries are often encountered outside courts, on lonely roads, and
guarding bridges. They seek out defeat by humans as a way of gaining
additional combat Pretenses. They are never seen with their armor off,
so they may be a role that other faeries take on when they wish to enjoy
some blood sport. Faerie Knights are more bound to the rules of chivalry
than real knights, and so they do not use the Damaging Effect Power on
their weapons against worthy foes.

Południca

**Faerie Might:** 10 (Auram)

**Characteristics:** Int +1, Per 0, Pre +3/--3, Com 0, Str 0, Sta 0, Dex
0, Qik 0

**Size:** 0

**Virtues and Flaws:** Faerie Sight, Faerie Speech; Incognizant,
Sovereign Ward (running water), Traditional Wards (questions)

**Personality Traits:** Curious +3

**Combat:**

*Scythe:* Init +1, Attack +6, Defense +4, Damage +5

**Soak:** +0

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20), Dead (21+)

**Abilities:** Awareness 3 (laziness), Charm 2 (rural people), Faerie
Speech 5 (rural people), Local Farms Lore 6 (stewardship), Profession:
Farmer 6 (stewardship), Single Weapon 3 (rural people)

**Powers:**

*Cause Fatigue:* 0 points, Init 0, Ignem: Causes the loss of a long-term
fatigue level via heatstroke.

*Shift Human Shapes*: 1 point, Init --1, Corpus (beautiful to hideous
within a range of +3/--3 Presence)

*Transform Into Whirlwind*: 3 points, +2 Init, Auram

**Vis:** 2 pawns (scythe, Ignem)

**Appearance:** This faerie may appear as a beautiful maiden, a crone or
an adolescent girl. She wears a white dress and carries a scythe or
shears. She may travel as a dust devil, and is used as a nursery terror,
to frighten children so that they do not harm crops.

Południca usually appears around noon on hot days, and asks farmhands
difficult questions, or engages them in conversation. If the farmhand
tries to change the topic of their conversation, or cannot answer one of
the faerie\'s questions, she gives him heatstroke. If particularly
annoyed at this farmhand she might instead drive him insane, or cause
his death from hyperthermia. Południca are unable to spend Might points
during the winter.

Story Seed: Południca

There is a little girl in a village near the covenant who has an
imaginary friend. Her friend is a hyperthermia faerie, like Południca.
The girl, through an artistic temperament, some luck and an invitation
to play, has convinced the spirit that it should express emotional,
rather than atmospheric, warmth toward the girl. The girl\'s friendship
with the faerie keeps it close to her village, and does not alter its
attitude to other humans, so she poses a terrible risk to her
neighbours. The girl can be used as bait to trap the faerie and destroy
it.

Skilled characters might, instead, trap the faerie and over the course
of years, alter it. They would need to find a way to feed it sufficient
vitality that it can change role, spread stories about the faerie that
make the change of role easier, defend the role against other faeries
that attempt to fill it, then coach the girl to collaborate with it, so
that it becomes a more helpful harvest faerie.

Mateos, the Faerie Butler

**Faerie Might:** 10 (Herbam)

**Characteristics:** Int --1, Per 0, Pre --1, Com +3, Str --2, Sta +2,
Dex 0, Qik --3

**Size:** --2

**Age:** n/a (40)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Narrowly Cognizant

**Personality Traits:** Convivial +3, Generous +2, Careful --2

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:** Club: Init --2, Attack +4, Defense 0, Damage +1

**Soak:** +2

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--3), --3 (4--6), --5 (7--9), Incapacitated
(10--12)

**Pretenses:** Carouse 9 (drinking), Charm 4 (drunk people), Etiquette 2
(parties), Faerie Lore 3 (drinks), Folk Ken 3 (drunk people), Guile 9
(convincing people to drink more), Living Language 5 (metaphors for
drinking and getting drunk), Music 1 (drinking songs), Single Weapon
(club) 1

**Powers:**

*Heady Brew,* 0 points, Init --10, Corpus: Any drink served by Mateos is
three times as intoxicating as normal. Drinks that were non-alcoholic to
start with become as alcoholic as ale. This does not change the taste of
the drink. The extra intoxication is a magical effect, with Penetration
10, and can be resisted.

*Unending Drinks,* 1 point, Init --10, Aquam: For as long as he is
serving a particular person, the drink in Mateos\'s barrel does not run
out, even if he serves other people as well. If the chosen person (who
is not the target of the power, and thus cannot resist) leaves, passes
out, or stops drinking for any other reason, the contents of the barrel
start to run out.

**Equipment:** Barrel of alcoholic drink.

**Encumbrance:** 3 (3)

**Vis:** 1 pawn of Herbam in each hand.

**Appearance:** Mateos is the size of a child, with a large pot belly,
full beard sprinkled with gray, and a slightly grubby apron. He is
always smiling, and offers just about everyone he meets a drink from his
barrel.

Mateos lives for parties, particularly parties with lots of drunkenness
and stupid behavior. If he arrives somewhere where there isn\'t a party,
he tries to start one. With his faerie ale (or wine, or cider), it
doesn\'t usually take him very long. Once people start getting drunk, he
tries to convince them to do ridiculous and embarrassing things. He does
not usually encourage people to do things that could kill them, however.
The parties normally finish with everyone but Mateos passed out on the
floor.

The Gift makes Mateos feel that the Gifted individual is a killjoy
opposed to parties, and someone to be hurried out of the way as soon as
possible.

Jumayl, A Jinni Guide

**Faerie Might:** 15 (Vim)

**Characteristics:** Int --1, Per +2, Pre 0, Com 0, Str +2, Sta +0, Dex
+2, Qik +3

**Size:** 0

**Age:** appears 25

**Confidence:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Jinni; Faerie Speech, Highly Cognizant, Improved
Characteristics, Second Sight, Skinchanger, Warrior, Well-Traveled,
Wilderness Sense; Greater Malediction (keep any bargain made); Carefree,
Dutybound (Bedouin honor code), Traditional Ward (Bismillah Invocation),
Vulnerable to Folk Tradition.

**Personality Traits:** Impulsive +3, Cheerful +3, Impious --1

**Reputation:** Skilled Caravan guard 2 (Mythic Middle East)

**Combat:**

*Long Sword:* Init +5, Attack +14, Defense +9, Damage +8

**Soak:** +3

**Wound Penalties: --**1 (1**--**5), --3 (6**--**10), --5 (11**--**15),
Incapacitated (16**--**20), Dead (21+)

**Pretenses:** Animal Handling 3 (camels), Athletics 3 (running), Mythic
Middle East Lore 4 (trade routes), Awareness 3 (alertness), Brawl 3
(dagger), Bows 5 (short bow), Carouse 2 (power drinking), Faerie Speech
5, al-Mushaqqar Lore 2 (drinking establishments), Faerie Lore 3 (jinn),
Folk Ken 4 (mercenaries), Leadership 4 (battle), Ride 3 (camels), Second
Sight 3 (jinn), Single Weapon 7 (long sword), Survival 2 (deserts),
Theology: Islam 1 (jinn), Wilderness Sense 3 (find water).

**Powers:**

*Cuirass of the Zephyr,* 1 point, Init +3, Auram; as *Circling Winds of
Protection* with Duration of Recitation / Qira'a (as long as Jumayl
keeps reciting verses of the *Qur\'an* --- equivalent to Concentration).

*Blinding Light of the Pious,* 1 point, Init +3, Ignem; as *Flash of the
Scarlet Flames.*

*Tay al-Ard (Travel)*, 4 points, Init +1, Corpus; this power instantly
transports Jumayl and 2 individuals he holds hands with from one
location to another that he has visited before or has an Arcane
Connection to, regardless of distance. As Leap of Homecoming, with R:
Touch, T: Group

**Equipment:** a fine damascene steel long sword, leather scale caravan
guard armor, flashy jewelry

**Vis:** 3 pawns of Vim vis, camel\'s tooth

**Appearance:** Jumayl (\"little camel\") is a comely, lithe man of
uncertain oriental appearance, alabaster skin and white hair. One eye is
iridescent green, the other ocean blue. He favors swirling robes dyed a
deep blue color over light leather armor, highlighted by gold jewelry.

This jinni*,* one of the jann*,* is a mercenary guide, forced to wander
from caravanserai to caravanserai along the trade routes of the Levant,
Arabia, Persia, Transoxiana, and beyond for a crime his brother
committed. An excellent swordsman and skilled outdoorsman, he is well
known among the Muslim merchants and even Levantine Redcaps for his
easy-going nature and bravado in defending caravans from raiders and
brigands. Like most Faerie jinn*,* he can change into an animal form ---
in his case, a white wild Bactrian camel using his Skinchanger Virtue.

Although immune to Fatigue like other faeries, Jumayl is unusually
susceptible to the effects of mundane alcohol ― a weakness that helps
him to play his role within stories along the caravan routes. Unlike
most faeries, his Might points, once spent, can only recover if he gets
a full night\'s rest and eats a meal in the company of fellow travelers.
This must be done within a human community, eating travel rations or
caravanserai meals, drinking beverages fermented by humans and listening
to humans sing or tell tales about their travels. For every eight hours
the character rests, he recovers a number of Might Points equal to the
prevailing Aura as modified by the Realm Interaction Table, or 1,
whichever is greater. He does not actually need to eat or drink however.
Jumayl knows enough about wizards to avoid leaving Arcane Connections
carelessly and keeps his True Name a close secret.

Tarlan the Wolf

**Faerie Might:** 20 (Animal)

**Characteristics:** Int --2, Per +5, Pre 0, Com --3, Str +3, Sta +3,
Dex +2, Qik +3

**Size:** --1

**Age:** n/a

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Incognizant

**Personality Traits:** Relentless +3, Cheerful --3

**Reputations:** Soul-eating demon (local) 1

**Combat:** Bite: Init +9, Attack +10, Defense +10, Damage +6

**Soak:** +7

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--4), --3 (5--8), --5 (9--12), Incapacitated
(13--16)

**Pretenses:** \[Area\] Lore 6 (hunting tracks), Athletics 5 (running),
Awareness 8 (spotting quarry), Brawl 3 (bite), Hunt 10 (human beings),
Living Language 2 (threats), Stealth 9 (hunting), Survival 7 (forests)

**Powers:**

*Marked Quarry:* 1 point, Init +5, Mentem: Tarlan can pick a single
human being whom he can see and who can see him, and mark him as quarry
for the hunt. This inspires the victim with a strong fear of Tarlan,
requiring a Brave roll against an Ease Factor of 9 to overcome, and
specifically makes him likely to run.

*Prey\'s Vigor:* 1 point, Init +8, Corpus: By breathing on a tired
person (anyone who has lost Fatigue levels), Tarlan can restore them to
full vigor (i.e. all Fatigue levels are regained). However, the target
also ages one year. This power can only be used if the target is close
enough to actually feel the wolf\'s breath on his skin, and only works
on adults.

*Silent Running:* 0 points, constant, Imaginem: Tarlan makes no noise
unless he deliberately decides to.

**Equipment:** None. He\'s a wolf.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Vis:** 2 pawns of Intellego in his nose, 1 pawn of Intellego in each
ear.

**Appearance:** A large, deep black wolf with eyes that glint even when
there seems to be no light around. He moves silently and can stay hidden
unless he really wants his quarry to see him.

Tarlan exists to hunt people. He picks individuals who are in the
wilderness by themselves, marks them as quarry, and then harries them to
exhaustion. Once they can run no further, he bursts out of cover, and,
somehow, the victims regain their vigor at that moment, finding that
they can run away once more. The wolf can keep the hunt up indefinitely,
but normally he times a final attack, on an exhausted victim, to happen
just before dawn. If the quarry is particularly resourceful, he might
keep the hunt up longer.

Tarlan does not always kill his victims, leaving some alive to tell the
tale of their ordeal. He likes the idea that people are scared of him
even before he uses his power. Indeed, he has occasionally not needed to
use *Marked Quarry* at all.

The wolf does have one weakness. He cannot enter holy ground, so a
victim who can run into a church or graveyard is safe. Tarlan knows
this, and tries to herd his victims away from such places. In addition,
because *Prey\'s Vigor* cannot affect children, Tarlan never hunts them.
In fact, he\'s come to feel somewhat protective of them, on the grounds
that, if he can\'t hunt them, no-one else is going to. Finally, The Gift
inspires respect in the faerie. He never hunts Gifted individuals, and
might even be happy to work with one who let him hunt people.

Valkyrie

**Faerie Might:** 20

**Characteristics:** Int 0, Per 0, Pre 0, Com 0, Str 0, Sta 0, Dex +3,
Qik +1

**Size:** 0

**Virtues and Flaws:** Faerie Sight, Faerie Speech; Incognizant,
Visions\*

\* Valkyries know where and when worthy men are likely to die.

**Personality Traits:** Brave +5, Judgmental +3

**Combat:**

Axe and Round Shield (unmounted): Init +2, Attack +16, Defense +12,
Damage +6

Axe and Round Shield (mounted): Init +2, Attack +19, Defense +15, Damage
+6

**Soak:** +9

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20), Dead (21+)

**Pretenses:** Awareness 9 (battlefields), Brawl 9 (einherjar), Ride 5
(wolf), Single Weapon 9 (giants)

**Powers:**

*Fly:* 0 points, constant, usually Corpus but sometimes Animal: The
character is capable of flight. The character may use the Athletics
skill to simulate difficult maneuvers, but may not engage in combat
while flying incredibly swiftly. The faerie may not fly when heavily
encumbered, or with a passenger of its Size or more, unless assisted by
another faerie that shares the load.

**Equipment:** Arms, armor, wolf mount, vast quantities of wine.

**Vis:** 4 Corpus, a dead vulture

**Appearance:** Shield maidens or crones that ride wolves above
battlefields, and select the worthy dead. They have excellent equipment
and extraordinary training.

Wolf Mount

**Faerie Might:** 20 (made of the glamour of the Valkyrie and shares her
Might pool)

**Characteristics:** Cun +2, Per 0, Pre --2, Com 0, Str +2, Sta +3, Dex
+2, Qik --4

**Size:** +3

**Virtues and Flaws:** Faerie Sight, Ferocity (when hungry) Sharp Ears

**Personality Traits:** Brave +3, Cowardly +3

**Combat**:

Teeth: Init --2, Attack +12, Defense +6, Damage +3

**Soak:** +7

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--8), --3 (8--16), --5 (17--24),
Incapacitated (25--32), Dead (33+)

**Pretenses**: Athletics 5 (distance running), Awareness 3 (smell),
Brawl 5 (teeth), Hunt 4 (track by smell), Survival 3 (winter)

**Powers:**

When the valkyrie uses *Fly* the wolf, as part of her glamour, flies
too. The valkyrie can carry a passenger with the aid of her wolf.

**Vis:** None: the wolf is an extension of the valkyrie.

**Appearance:** A wolf the size of a horse, with saddle and harness. Its
thick fur gives it a Protection of 1 and it wears leather covers which
act as partial barding.

These minor goddesses of the Norse pantheon are no longer worshiped in
Mythic Europe, but have been encountered by magi in Elysium, and in
their ancient places of power in Scandinavia. Their name means \"Chooser
of the Slain\", because they are believed to choose who lives and dies
during battle, and which spirits are worthy of transformation into
einherjar, spiritual warriors awaiting Ragnarok. They also act as
serving maids in Valhalla. Many have names that evoke the tumult of
battle. They ride through the sky, invisibly, on wolves.

Great Lezi

**Faerie Might:** 40 (Herbam)

**Characteristics:**

For Size 0\*: Int +3, Per +3, Pre --2, Com 0, Str +6\*, Sta +3, Dex 0,
Qik 0\*

\*For every +1 Size, add +2 Strength and subtract 1 Quickness. For every
--1 in Size, subtract 2 Strength and add +1 Quickness.

**Size:** varies from --10 to +7. A Lezi may change size in increments
of fractions of an inch, if it wishes.

**Virtues and Flaws:** 3 x Great Characteristic; Faerie Sight, Faerie
Speech, Highly Cognizant, 5 x Improved Characteristics; Sovereign Ward
(may not leave forest), Some Lezis, particularly those with backward
feet, are unable to harm humans who have turned all of their clothes
backwards.

**Personality Traits:** Loves Forest +5

**Combat:**

*2 x Brawl (club)\** Init:1--Size, Attack 8, Defense 7--Size, Damage
+9+(Size x 2)

*\**The lezi\'s arms are made of solid wood, and do damage like a club.
They are wielded with the Brawl Pretense, even if the lezi generates
clubs to use in battle*.*

**Soak:** +15

**Wound Penalties:**

*For Size --3 or lower* --1 (1--2), --3 (3--4), --5 (5--6),
Incapacitated (7--8), Dead (9+)

*For Size --1* --1 (1--4), --3 (5--8), --5 (9--12), Incapacitated
(13--16), Dead (17+)

*For Size +1* --1 (1--6), --3 (7--12), --5 (13--18), Incapacitated
(19--25), Dead (26+)

*For Size +3* --1 (1--8), --3 (9--16), --5 (17--24), Incapacitated
(25--32), Dead (33+)

*For Size +7* --1 (1--12), --3 (13--24), --5 (25--36), Incapacitated
(37--48), Dead (49+)

**Pretenses:** Animal Handling 9 (woodland creatures), Athletics 3
(striding), Awareness 9 (damage to forest), Bargain 3 (from position of
strength), Brawl 6 (human interlopers), Carouse 3 (wine), Charm 2
(forest folk), Faerie Speech 5, Folk Ken 3 (forest folk), Forest Lore 9
(locations), Guile 2 (about woodland dangers), Leadership 9 (woodland
creatures), Swim 3 (streams).

**Powers:**

*Extended Glamour:* 0 points, constant, Mentem: Grants awareness of
everything that happens within the bounds of the forest. In essence, the
faerie is coterminous with the forest, so it is present simultaneously
everywhere within its boundaries.

*Focus Power (Manifestation):* 5 points, Init --5\*, Animal or Herbam.
Manifests the faerie\'s consciousness amongst animal and plant life its
glamor touches, temporarily controlling their actions. This power allows
the lezi to simulate any Creo Animal, Rego Animal, Creo Herbam or Rego
Herbam effect with a value of 25 spell levels or less, targeted at the
animals within its glamor and suiting its motif.

*Focus Power (Woodland Change):* 5 points, Init --5\*, Animal or Herbam:
Muto and Intellego effects only in Herbam and Animal.

*Focus Power (Size Reduction):* 5 points, Init --5, Corpus or Animal:
Greater Lezi are considered to naturally be Size +7, and use powers to
live at a smaller Size.

*Transform Into Animal*\*\*: 3 points, Init. --3\*, Animal: Transforms
the character into a land animal. Faeries retain the power of speech in
animal form.

*Transform Into Bird or Fish*\*\*: 3 points, Init: --3\*, Animal:
Transforms the character into a specified bird or fish. Faeries retain
the power of speech in animal form.

*Transform into Human*: This power costs the Lezi whatever it cost to
transform away from the human shape.

*Transform Into Object (Plant*)\*\*: 4 points, Init --4\*, Herbam: In
plant form, the lezi is capable of speech and limited movement.

\*Add appropriate Quickness modifier, based on Size.

\*\*Lezi are extraordinary in that they can change into any animal or
plant from their woodland: they do not specify alternative forms as
other creatures do.

**Equipment:** Can fabricate an endless variety of material from the
woodland.

**Vis:** 8 pawns, External vis, club

The Forest Lord is found in Slavic lands. He usually appears as a tall,
pale, bearded man with emerald eyes, but can take the shape of any plant
or animal. He may change his size from that of a blade of grass to that
of a tall tree. Many lezi have feet that face backward, and many are
faunlike. Great Lezi command woodland animals, particularly wolves. The
term \"great\" is used to compare this creature to the more common lezi,
which is a form of faun.

**Variants:** Gigantic fauns are found in the Basque country in Iberia.
Once they were much like other fauns, although even then they had
striking red fur. When humans won the right to till the country, these
fauns became agricultural faeries. They use their great height to plan
agricultural improvements, perform feats of remarkable engineering, and
shout warnings when predators approach. In the region they are called
Basajauns, but this is confusing because Basajaun is a large, wild faun
in the folklore of the surrounding peoples, who keeps house with his
wife and human slaves.

Lord Marsyne

**Faerie Might:** 50 (Aquam)

**Characteristics:** Int +2, Per +1, Pre +4, Com +1, Str 0, Sta 0, Dex
0, Qik 0

**Size:** 0

**Age:** n/a (40)

**Confidence Score:** 2 (6)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Great Characteristics, Improved Characteristics x
2, Narrowly Cognizant

**Personality Traits:** Proud +3, Just +1, Forgiving --3

**Reputations:** Grants eternal youth 2 (local)

**Combat:** Dodge: Init 0, Attack n/a, Defense 0, Damage n/a

**Soak:** +25 (+5 against iron or steel weapons)

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Pretenses:** \[Area\] Lore 5 (nobility), Awareness 3 (in his castle),
Charm 8 (human women), Etiquette 10 (courtly), Faerie Lore 6 (cold
faeries), Folk Ken 5 (people making requests), Guile 5 (pretending to
grant requests), Intrigue 4 (court politics), Leadership (servants) 7,
Language (All) 5 (commands), Magic Lore 2 (Hermetic magic), Order of
Hermes Lore 1 (Merinita)

**Powers:**

*Commanding Presence,* 1 point, Init +10, Mentem: Anyone who can see
Marsyne becomes awed by him, and gains a Personality Trait of Respectful
to Lord Marsyne +3. Even magi must roll this Trait, if they fail to
resist the spell. Disagreeing with him is Ease Factor 6, outright
contradiction is Ease Factor 9, and attacking is Ease Factor 15. This
power does not force obedience to the faerie\'s commands, but it does
force you to be subtle about refusing.

*Entomb,* 10 points, Init --10, Mentem: A single human target is
entombed in ice. The effect is Mentem because it also suspends the
target\'s awareness, so that he or she does not need to eat, drink, or
breathe, and does not think, dream, or remember while in the ice.
Marsyne can break the effect at will, or it can be dispelled. If it is
broken, the person returns to awareness without, immediately, realizing
that they were unconscious. People do, normally, age while entombed, and
can die of old age.

*Gift of Youth,* 10 points, Init --10, Corpus: This power targets a
single woman, who stops aging. As long as she remains in Marsyne\'s
castle, she does not age at all. If she leaves, she has the benefit of
the Unaging Minor Virtue, so she might not realize that she is aging
again. Once aging has restarted, it does not stop if the woman returns
to the castle. The power only works on human women, and Marsyne normally
only uses it on his wives.

*Inner Warmth,* 1 point, Init 0, Ignem: The recipient of this gift is
unaffected by mundane cold until she (or he) enters an aura aligned with
a realm other than Faerie. (Simply leaving a Faerie aura for an area
with no aura doesn\'t end it, but entering a Magic, Infernal, or Divine
aura does.) The gift provides no protection against magical cold.

*Lord of Ice,* 1 or more points, Init +8, Aquam: Marsyne can create any
effect he wants involving ice, including effects that would require a
Hermetic ritual. For every point he spends, up to a maximum of 5, the
effect has three Hermetic magnitudes of power. Thus, if he spends 5
points, he can create a 15th magnitude effect.

*Lord of the Castle,* 0 points, Init +15, Mentem or Corpus: Marsyne can
command any one of his servants to do anything, and the command is
irresistible. He can also take control of the servant\'s body, and move
it like a puppet, or even make it fly through the air. The only limits
are that he can only target one servant at once, and can only target
beings who have voluntarily agreed to serve him. Most are faeries, but
his wives also qualify.

**Equipment:** Anything he wants, although particularly elaborate items
gained particularly quickly will be faerie glamor rather than real.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Vis:** 10 Aquam, in his blood.

**Appearance:** Tall, well-built, and handsome, with white skin, pale
blond hair, and eyes the clear gray of sea ice. He wears fine clothes in
white and blue, and a crown of diamonds rests on his brow. He almost
looks like a human being, but the authority in his voice belies that, as
does the fact that literal ice water runs in his veins; when he bleeds,
there are small crystals of ice in the water that flows out.

Lord Marsyne is the ruler of a faerie domain in the far north or in a
range of high mountains. His home is a castle of fantastic beauty, made
entirely of ice, and he has an extensive faerie retinue. Marsyne and his
faeries act out an elaborate charade of the routines and festivals of
mundane noble life, hunting strange creatures, holding tournaments, and
even passing judgment on criminals within the court.

Most of the time, the court has little direct contact with humans.
However, Lord Marsyne always has a human wife, and every so often he
needs to find a new one. He always chooses a beautiful, young woman, and
looks for some spark of creativity, independence, and spirit. He is
quite taken by The Gift, and any beautiful, young Gifted woman in the
area he is searching is very likely to be wooed. The wooing is utterly
sincere, as the wife must return of her own free will.

Marsyne\'s wife plays an important role in the politics of the court,
having her own set of faerie ladies-in-waiting and servants, and
presiding over many of the tournaments. She also plays an important
mystical role, as her presence and creativity allow the faeries to do
new things. One thing she is not, is a physical wife to Lord Marsyne.

As long as the wife follows the rules of the court, everything is fine.
Marsyne makes her unaging, and protects her from the cold. If she breaks
the rules, however, Marsyne judges her, entombs her in ice, and seeks
out a new wife. He has many entombed wives, as some of the rules are
along the lines of the classic \"Do not go into this room. Here is the
key.\"

It is also possible for a wife to win her freedom, either through a
successful challenge by an external champion, or through her own wits.
Lord Marsyne remains fond of any wife who wins her freedom fairly,
because that is part of the rules, but any who simply flee are brought
back and entombed in the ice.

Infernal Creatures

Infernal creatures are sometimes called demons or devils. These terms
refer to the same group of creatures, and the choice of which to use is
purely a matter of personal preference. There are some creatures with
Infernal Might that are not true demons --- physical beings that have
been greatly corrupted by the Infernal. These beings may not have all
the powers and features of true demons.

All demons can put off their physical forms and revert to being pure
spirits at will. In combat, they can only do this on their action, but
while they are not physical, they cannot attack or be attacked
physically. They can also move as quickly as they like, and are not
hindered by physical barriers, but they remain fully aware of their
surroundings.

Demons are never noticeably bothered by The Gift. This may be because
they try their best to damn everyone, so hostile behavior towards The
Gifted looks no different.

Demonic Powers

All demons have the following powers:

*Coagulation*, 1 point per 10 Might (or fraction), Init --1, Corpus:
This power allows demons manufacture a solid body from the ambient,
unformed matter of the universe. They may only take a single specific
form with this power (the one described under Appearance in the demon\'s
statistics) unless they have another power which allows them to alter
it. Manifesting a physical form takes a round for every point of
Infernal Might possessed by the demon; those with a high Infernal Might
have more power which they must collect and force into solid form. The
demon can end this power at any time, allowing its body to become finer
and more rarefied and return to its natural state. Dissolution of the
solid form is almost instantaneous, taking only a round of concentration
from the demon, although this concentration may be disrupted.

The game statistics of a demon do not change regardless of whether it is
in its physical or spiritual form, although a demon in spiritual form
may not use its physical Characteristics. This power may not be a Corpus
effect if the demon\'s body is naturally of a different substance, such
as composed of elemental matter, or in the shape of an animal. Demons in
Christian lands are forced to abandon their coagulated form on Holy
Saturday (see Religious Limitations on Demons, later).

*Obsession*, 1 to 3 points, Init --5, Vim: Every demon possesses a
particular sin --- called its Obsession Trait --- which it may attempt
to impose upon a mortal whenever the mortal indulges in a venial sin. A
demon can only use this power when there is a chink in the armor of
virtue; that is, when a person is indulging in sinful thoughts or deeds.
At this moment, the demon can impose its Obsession trait, if it
penetrates Magic Resistance. The victim is assailed with sinful
thoughts, and acquires a Personality Trait to represent these thoughts,
with a score equal to the number of Might points spent by the demon
(maximum of 3). When the victim is next presented with the opportunity
to act on the Obsession Trait, the victim\'s player must make a simple
roll and add the Obsession Trait; this must be lower than a simple
roll + any other suitable Personality Trait to successfully resist the
impulses (a Trait which is similar to the imposed Trait may act as a
penalty instead). If the Obsession roll fails, then the demon\'s power
has failed and the Obsession trait is lost. If the Obsession roll is
higher, the victim gives in to sin, permanently acquiring the Obsession
Trait at +1 (or increasing it by one if he already possesses it). Any
further succumbing to this trait counts as sinful, rather than as an
action forced by a demon.

Each demon can inflict only certain traits, representing its particular
role in the corruption of mankind; these Personality Traits are listed
under the creature\'s powers. Due to its low initiative, it is unlikely
that this power will be used by a demon when in physical combat.

Example of Obsession

Bartholomew has the Obsession Trait of Avarice. He sees a nun collecting
alms for the orphanage, and bumps into her deliberately on the street.
The nun\'s flash of anger over his apparent clumsiness gives Bartholomew
the doorway he needs, and he imposes the Trait upon her, spending three
of his Might Pool. When the nun is counting her pennies later that day,
she has an opportunity to act on the demonically-induced greed, so is
forced to make an Avarice personality roll. She rolls a 5, +3 for the
Obsession trait for a total of 8. Her opposing die roll is only a 6, but
she also has the Generous Personality Trait, for a total of 9. She
resists the impulse to steal, and resolves to pray harder, shocked that
she even considered such an act.

The next day, Bartholomew observes a reeve fleecing his lord of taxes,
and imposes his Avarice trait on him, again spending 3 points. The reeve
is immediately presented with the opportunity to be even more larcenous,
so must make a roll. He rolls a simple die (3) and adds the Obsession
Trait of +3 for a total of 6. The opposing die roll (a 6) is penalised
by the reeve\'s own Greedy Personality Trait of +1, and so the reeve
steals even more money from his lord than he was intending. The reeve\'s
Greedy trait increases to +2, and Bartholomew makes a note to return
here again soon.

*Envisioning*, 1 or 5 points, Init +0, Mentem: This power allows a demon
to appear in the dreams of a sleeping target (in which case it costs 1
point), or make the target experience a waking dream or vision (in which
case it costs 5 points). A demon cannot instantly make substantial
changes to a dream, but can gradually twist it to take on a darker and
frightening tone, and can speak through any figure from the victim\'s
subconscious. A waking dream is more obvious; the victim suffers an
immediate and powerful hallucination of whatever the demon desires. This
may be so frightening that the victim is stunned for a round, and must
make a Brave Personality roll against an Ease Factor of 9 or have an
extreme reaction, such as retching, convulsions or abject terror. This
is the only way in which a spiritual demon can communicate with mortals.

Many (but not all) demons also have the following power:

*Possession*, variable points, Init +2, Mentem: To possess a human, the
demon may expend any number of points from its Might Pool to create a
Possession Might Pool; these points actually enter the possessed
creature and will not be regenerated by the demon until the possession
is ended. The more of its Might it expends to use this power, the more
the demon can do with its host (also called an *energumen*), but the
weaker the Penetration. If the target\'s resistance is overcome by this
power, the victim is possessed by the demon, and is under its direct
control. If the demon uses all of its current Might Pool in a possession
then its spiritual form effectively enters the victim and resides within
(forcing the loss of any physical form). Alternatively, a demon may
divide its consciousness by only placing a portion of its Might within a
victim, allowing the possessing part of it act independently from the
rest (which remains in spiritual or physical form). In this situation,
the separate parts of the demon\'s consciousness may only communicate
information learned since the split when within sight of each other;
otherwise they should be considered independent copies of the demon\'s
mind.

The demon may use any of its powers that it has sufficient Possession
Might Pool to use, but these points do not regenerate until the
possession ends. The demon may choose to extend its power over its host
to give it Magic Resistance equal to the Possession Might; if it does
so, then the host is excluded from wards against supernatural beings
just as if it were the demon itself. The same is true if the host is
currently under the effects of one of the demon\'s powers. In all other
situations, the demon can \'hide\' within the host, and walk through
such wards with impunity.

If the demon attempts to force the victim to act contrary to his nature,
or to use any of the energumen\'s own magical powers, the demon must
spend points from its Possession Might Pool. A supernatural power
(including spell-casting) requires 1 Might point per magnitude (for a
spell or similar effect); 1 Might point per point of a Supernatural
Ability (such as Entrancement); or Might points equal to the Might
points expended by the energumen. A questionable action which is
contrary to the nature of the host requires the demon to exceed the
possessed being\'s Personality Trait roll on a stress die + Might points
spent. The storyguide may give a modifier to the Personality Trait roll
based on the nature of the command. Over time, exercise of the demon\'s
Obsession power on the host may result in a reduced resistance to such
questionable actions. Note that use of a supernatural power might also
be contrary to the victim\'s nature, in which case both costs must be
met.

Once the Possession Might Pool placed into the victim reaches zero, the
possession ends. Note that a being can be possessed with as little as 1
Might point, as long as the demon does not wish to do too much with its
host. Furthermore, a demon may possess more than one host
simultaneously, and can direct each independently. Vim spells may be
used on the energumen to target the demon rather than the host; these
must overcome the demon\'s Infernal Might in the usual way, but drain
the Possession Might Pool, not the Infernal Might.

Demons and Magic

Hermetic magic cannot pierce any deception produced by a demon, although
other varieties of Supernatural Powers (particularly Divine Powers) may
well be able to do so. A demon\'s lie is not detected with *Frosty
Breath of the Spoken Lie*, a demonic illusion does not show up as false
with *Discern the Images of Truth and Falsehood*, and a shape-changed
demon appears to be a mundane creature if *Sight of the True Form* is
used. Even if a magus casts a spell of compulsion on a demon, he cannot
force it to tell the truth. This \'protection\' from truth-revealing
magics need not involve an active act of deception on behalf of the
demon; the presence of a demon\'s Infernal Might is invisible to
Hermetic magic, as is the stench of Hell in their Infernal Powers.
However, only Infernal Powers used by demons are immune to detection;
use of Infernal Powers by humans may be detected with Hermetic magic.

The Ease Factor for the Second Sight Ability to detect naturally
invisible things (such as spirits) is normally 9. However, the sheer
deceptiveness of demons is such that this Ease Factor is increased by
the magnitude of their Might. If this Ability derives from non-Divine
sources, then it may not pierce illusions created by demons at all; in
the case of Second Sight of a Divine origin, use the normal Ease Factor
of 6 + magnitude of Might to pierce these deceptions.

A Hermetic magus must be able to sense his target to affect it, and a
demon in its spiritual form cannot be sensed through mundane means, nor
may it be sensed through Hermetic magic due to its inherent
deceptiveness. If a spiritual demon can be tricked into using its
supernatural powers (and a magus is able to detect the power\'s effect
without the use of Hermetic magic) then he can target the demon with his
spells. Otherwise, he must rely on other resources such as Second Sight,
Sense Holiness and Unholiness, or Divine Powers (his own or another\'s)
to reveal the demon.

Demons can be warded off by the Form listed next to their Infernal
Might, and, if in physical form, may be affected by magics corresponding
to that Form. Thus, in addition to the Rego Vim spell *Ward Against
Demons,* which affects all demons, there is a Rego Animal *Ward Against
Animal Demons*, a Rego Aquam *Ward Against Water Demons*, and so forth.
Demons are mostly intelligent beings and may also be targeted by Mentem
spells.

The Infernal Might of a demon may be manipulated with the Art of Vim.
Demons may be attacked with Perdo Vim spells such as *Demon\'s Eternal
Oblivion* (or its non-Hermetic equivalents) in either form, assuming the
target has been sensed. The Infernal Might of the demon is reduced by a
successful casting of this spell, and the demon also loses any Might
Pool that exceeds its new reduced Infernal Might. As the demon\'s
Infernal Might is reduced, subsequent Perdo Vim spells penetrate more
easily, and have greater effect. The demon\'s body is actually eroded
using these magics, and a demon that is reduced to an Infernal Might of
zero is destroyed, leaving behind no corpse (and thus no vis). Demons in
either spiritual or physical form may be attacked with these spells and
the result is the same.

All demons are entirely immune to magic which would cause them to act in
a contrary way to their Personality Traits.

Demons may be summoned and compelled by Hermetic Magic, although the
Oath of Hermes specifically forbids it. Knowing a spell which will
either summon or compel a demon is grounds for expulsion from the Order
and a Wizard\'s March.

Demonic Weaknesses

All demons are vulnerable to expressions of God\'s power, whether this
is the sacraments of a faith, a prayer from a devout follower, or the
relic of a saint. Relics, as supremely holy items, are anathema to
demons, as described in the Realms chapter (page @@). A character who
has a focus for her prayers (such as a rosary, a phylactery or so forth)
and who successfully invokes God\'s aid to defeat a demon (see *Realms
of Power: The Divine*, page 41) gains twice the usual bonus. Any object
which is an intrinsic part of Divine worship, but not actually a relic
in its own right (such as a Church bible, the Host, the scrolls of the
Torah) is a Vulnerability (see below) of all demons.

All demons have an additional weakness. These may place limits on what a
demon can and cannot do (in any form), or it might cause wounds in some
circumstances, in which case only the physical form is affected. To
determine whether a character has learned the weakness of a specific
demon, he must have had some prior exposure to knowledge of the demon
(for example, through study of a catalog of demons), and must make an
Intelligence + Infernal Lore roll against an Ease Factor of 9 + (Might
/5). Subtract 3 from the Ease Factor if the demon is a member of a
family, for all members of a family share the same weakness. Failure
indicates that the character does not know the weakness of this demon,
but can make another attempt to discover it once his score in Infernal
Lore increases.

Weaknesses should be chosen from the following list:

**Abhorrent Material/Circumstance**: The demon cannot abide a particular
type of object or substance, or a particular circumstance. This may be a
common material such as light, salt or garlic (for weak demons); or a
reasonably uncommon, such as iron horse-shoes, or objects that have been
given names, or charms made of rowan wood, for the more powerful demons.
The material or circumstance inflicts no actual damage, but should such
a thing come into the demon\'s presence, it must flee; or else spend a
Confidence point to remain for two minutes. If it is unable to do
either, then a brave or foolhardy soul may be able to strike a bargain
with the demon using the advantage he has gained. A demon in the
presence of its Abhorrent Material or Circumstance cannot regain spent
Might points. This weakness affects demons in both spiritual and
physical form, but demons possessing a human are more resistant to their
weaknesses, and may make a Stamina roll against an Ease Factor of 6 to
remain in the presence of the abhorred material. If the roll is failed,
they must either make their host flee, or if this is not possible, end
the possession and flee themselves.

**Compulsiveness**: The demon is compelled to enumerate
randomly-scattered objects; if, for example, a jar of beans is scattered
in the path of this demon, it must count every one before it can
proceed. The objects must be purposefully scattered in sight of the
demon to hinder it.

**Ordering**: The demon has no power over anything which is sealed,
counted, measured or tied up. It cannot open sealed vessels, steal grain
from a bushel (although it can falsify the weighing in the first place),
and so forth. Many demons in Jewish lore have this limitation.

**Protected Group**: The demon cannot act directly against a particular,
reasonably common, group of people. It may not be able to affect
children, or men with beards, or female Muslims. None of its
supernatural powers work on this group, and if they face it in combat,
it can only defend itself. A person who is not a member of the protected
group is safe from the demon if he remains within a defined group of at
least 9 others who *are* protected from the demon. Likewise, 2
vulnerable people can hide within a group with a total size of twenty,
and so forth.

**Running Water**: The demon cannot cross running water. This must be
fresh water deriving directly from within the earth --- spilled water
from a jar will not hinder them.

**Vulnerability**: A certain substance (see Abhorrent Material for
example) causes a Light Wound to the demon merely by touch. The more
powerful the demon, the rarer this substance should be. Any weapons made
of the material to which the demon is vulnerable inflict a Light Wound
to the demon on a successful attack in addition to any damage inflicted
as a result of the attack, even if the demon\'s soak absorbed all the
other damage. Light is a common Vulnerability of weak demons.

Religious Limitations on Demons

In Christian lands, all demons are forced to abandon their physical form
at dawn on Holy Saturday (the day between Good Friday and Easter Day);
furthermore, no demon may spend Might points from this point until dusk
on Easter Day. This is a reminder of Christ\'s victory over Satan and
subsequent descent into Hell to bring the good news to the souls trapped
there.

For Jewish families, if all sins committed in the past year by the
adults of the household are atoned and forgiven in the five days between
the holy days of Yom Kippur and Sukkot (in September--October), then all
demons who are currently affecting their family must flee the household
and not return for a year.

No demon can use any Infernal Might to directly affect a Muslim who has
completed the *hajj* (pilgrimage to Mecca) within the last year. The
*hajj* must be properly and devoutly performed to grant this immunity.

Demons and Free Will

All demons possess free will as an essential part of their nature, but
they have already made the choice for evil (or, as Judaism would have
it, are doing God\'s will by being evil). Because demons are dominated
by their evil inclinations, they always act according to their selfish
and wicked impulses. Demons are wholly corrupt, so the free choices they
make are also wholly corrupt. Demons have no virtues at all, which
includes such virtues as patience, courage, and self-control. This means
that demons are not good at elaborate long-term plans that provide no
immediate pay-off. The mastermind behind such a plan would be a human
diabolist, or a faerie. See Chapter 4 of *Realms of Power: The Infernal*
for more information on using demons in a saga.

Confidence is an aspect of free will, representing the ability of demons
to put aside their base impulses and act in a rational manner. Not all
demons have Confidence, so some demons are incapable of acting against
the dictates of their passions.

Demons, Auras and Regiones

Infernal creatures recover spent power more quickly in Infernal auras
and regiones. Might Pool usually refreshes at a constant rate such that
that all Might would be restored in a day; i.e. Infernal Might / 24
points per hour. In an Infernal aura, it refreshes at a faster rate:

**Number of hours to restore all Might: 24 -- (2 x Infernal Aura)**

**Might points restored per hour: Infernal Might / Number of hours**

Thus a demon with an Infernal Might of 25 resting in an Infernal aura of
6 regains 25 points in 12 hours (approximately 2 points an hour), which
is twice as fast as usual.

A demon cannot regenerate any Might in a Divine aura. In all other auras
they refresh their Might at the usual rate.

Baal-Peor, Lord of Filth

**Infernal Might:** 30 (Corpus)

**Characteristics:** Int +1, Per +2, Pre --5, Com +1, Str +4, Sta +5,
Dex +1, Qik +1

**Size:** +2

**Confidence Score**: 3 (9 points)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Oversensitive (coitus), Obese

**Personality Traits:** Proud +6, Hungry +3, Shame --3

**Reputations:** Treasurer of Hell 6 (Infernal), Demon of Filth 5
(Infernal)

**Combat:**

Noxious Vomit: Init +9, Attack +12, Defense n/a, Damage +12\*

Claws: Init +4, Attack +5, Defense +6, Damage +6\*\*

\*See power description

\*\*Claws are coated in excrement. Unless injuries are cleaned
carefully, they will fester and never heal. A roll on the Recovery Table
that results in an Improvement indicates stability, while a Stable
result indicates that the wound worsens. Once the infection has set in,
only Divine aid in healing cleanses the wounds.

**Soak:** +8

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0/0, --1/--1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--7), --3 (8--14), --5 (15--21),
Incapacitated (22--28)

**Abilities:** Artes Liberales 4 (arithmetic), Brawl 4 (claws), Civil
and Canon Law 4 (trade), Folk Ken 6 (fornication), Infernal Lore 5
(wealth), Intrigue 7 (envy), Medicine 4 (poisons), Profession: Merchant
7 (unfair deals)

**Powers:**

*Form of Woman*, 0 points, Init 0, Corpus: Baal-Peor can take the form
of a woman, although he cannot use this power to mimic a specific woman.
He always chooses a form which will be considered beautiful by the
target audience of his schemes.

*Noxious Vomit*, 1 point, Init +9, Corpus: This power allows Baal-Peor
to spray vast amounts of vomit (or, facing the other way, even less
pleasant substances) through an area. His vomit is an expression of his
spiritual vileness, and does the damage indicated in his combat
statistic through corrosion, except to characters with True Faith, whom
it cannot touch. The target must make a Strength + Size stress roll
against an Ease Factor of 9 or be sent flying backwards. Anyone
successfully struck by this vileness continues to suffer +3 damage in
each round until it is washed off. This damage does not stack for
multiple successful attacks.

*Swallow Assault,* 5 points, Init +3, Terram: Baal-Peor may avoid injury
from mundane objects by opening his maw so wide that the attack slides
harmlessly down his throat.

*Coagulation*, 3 points, Init --1, Corpus

*Obsession*, 1 to 3 points, Init --5, Vim: Shamelessness, Gluttony

*Shroud the Stench of the Pit*, variable points, Init +3, Vim: This
power may be used in two manners, both of which affect the expression of
other supernatural powers. A demon can conceal the Infernal nature of
any other supernatural power, making it appear to be magical or faerie
instead. This power is used on an overt expression of power, to prevent
spells from recognizing it as infernal in origin. Secondly, it may be
used on more subtle powers to remove all stench of the supernatural,
making them appear wholly mundane. This power costs Might points equal
to the original cost of the power being concealed, or Might points equal
to the magnitude of the Infernal effect if it does not cost might to
use. This power lasts for as long as the power it is masking.

*The Wealth of Nations*, 3 points, Init 0, Terram: The demon can summon
riches; each use of this power can create wealth equivalent to up to
pound of gold for every point of Infernal Might possessed by the demon.
This wealth can be of any form --- gold, gems, rich tapestries, ivory,
etc. --- but it is always has intrinsic value, rather than being
valuable because of its utility (a roomful of grain, for example). This
wealth is not created, it is instead summoned from somewhere else,
chosen by the demon, usually for the greatest effect. This might be a
royal treasury on the other side of Europe or the purse of the man
standing next to you.

*His Master\'s Voice*, variable points, Init +1, Vim: The demon can
summon other demons or corrupt beasts to its current location. This
costs one Might point for every point of Infernal Might of the being
summoned, so is used sparingly. The demon has no control over the demon
he has summoned.

**Weakness:** Running water

**Vis:** 6 pawns of Perdo, in tongue

**Appearance:** Baal-Peor appears as an immensely fat naked man, with
rolls of flab cascading down his body. He is completely hairless, and
has a repulsive, snake--like tongue. He wears a serpent wrapped around
his girth like a belt, and its head is usually draped over his shoulder.

Baal-Peor (or Belphegor) is a demon of wealth. He creates discord by
moving mortal riches in disruptive ways (using the *Wealth of Nations*
power). He gives money to the vulnerable, so that the strong are tempted
to take it. He gives the possessions of the powerful to others. This
tempts the recipients to keep their stolen treasures, and rouses the
powerful to recover them by force.

Baal-Peor was worshipped, in ancient times, less as a wealth-god than as
an embodiment of the desire to consume everything and transform it into
vileness. His title, \"Lord of the Openings\" describes him: an
unfillable mouth leading to a ceaseless defecation. Priests and pilgrims
used the space before his statue as a latrine, as a form of worship.
Baal-Peor, it is said, was sent by his masters to seek the truth of
rumors that humans lived in marital bliss. He tried to live as a woman,
but was so disgusted by marital relations that he fled back to Hell.

Bartholomew

**Infernal Might:** 50 (Mentem)

**Characteristics:** Int +3, Per +2, Pre +3, Com +5, Str --1, Sta 0, Dex
--1, Qik --1

**Size:** 0

**Age:** n/a (50)

**Confidence Score:** 2 (9)

**Virtues and Flaws:** None

**Personality Traits:** Slothful +3, Gregarious +2, Retiring --2

**Reputations:** Excellent adviser on money matters 5 (local)

**Combat:** *Fist:* Init --1, Attack --1, Defense --1, Damage --1

**Soak:** +8

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** \[Area\] Lore 6 (trade routes) (Three of these, for the
area where he lives, the larger area including it, and the whole of
Europe), Artes Liberales 2 (arithmetic), Bargain 10 (trade goods), Charm
5 (merchants), Etiquette 4 (merchants), Folk Ken 8 (merchants), Guile 10
(trading), Intrigue 5 (market politics), Language 6 (trade talk), Latin
6 (ecclesiastical), Profession (merchant) 10 (cloth)

**Powers:**

*Merchant\'s Blessing,* 2 points, Init +0, Mentem: The recipient of this
blessing seems trustworthy to most people, and gets a +3 bonus on all
social rolls to do with trading. People react to him as if he has an
excellent reputation for honesty, fair dealing, and getting high quality
goods cheaply. The blessing lasts for a week, unless Bartholomew chooses
to renew it.

*Merchant\'s Curse,* 1 point, Init +0, Mentem: The inverse of
*Merchant\'s Blessing,* this curse makes people treat the victim as if
he had a strong reputation for dishonesty, cheating and reneging on
deals, and selling shoddy goods at inflated prices. He also has a --3
penalty to all social rolls to do with trading. The curse lasts for a
week, unless Bartholomew chooses to renew it.

*Merchant\'s Knowledge,* 0 points, automatic, Mentem: Bartholomew knows
what someone in receipt of his curses or blessings is doing with their
business.

*Project Blessing,* 2 points, Init +0, Vim: Bartholomew can bless a
particular commercial venture, so that chance favors it whenever
possible. This results in a very successful trading venture. The
blessing only lasts for one day, which isn\'t normally long enough to
have an effect, but Bartholomew can renew the blessing every day, if he
so chooses.

*Project Curse,* 1 point, Init +0, Vim: The inverse of *Project
Blessing,* this effect makes everything that could go wrong, go wrong.
It takes at most a month to drive someone to bankruptcy through this
power. As for the blessing, the curse only lasts for one day at a time.

*Coagulation*, 3 points, Init --1, Corpus

*Obsession*, 1 to 3 points, Init --5, Vim: Avarice

**Equipment:** Fine clothes, a nice house, trade goods.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Weakness:** Ordering

**Vis:** 10 pawns of Mentem vis, one in each of his fingers. Infernally
tainted.

**Appearance:** Bartholomew appears as an older, but still vigorous,
merchant. He is plump, but not fat, and while he never appears
positively cheerful, he also never seems angry, or impatient, at least
not with other merchants. His clothes are of excellent quality and
taste.

Bartholomew is a well-established and moderately successful merchant in
a trading city. He is known for being lazy, but still making an
extremely comfortable living from his trade. He also willingly gives
advice to other merchants, and they have noticed that following his
advice makes them rich, while disregarding it makes them poor. Most
people in the city also think that Bartholomew attends church regularly.
In fact, being a demon, he has never set foot inside a consecrated
building. He has, on the other hand, made substantial donations to the
Church, and those donations are well known.

The advice he gives is good business advice in itself, but he normally
backs it up with his blessings, at least for a while. If his advice is
ignored, he uses his curses to make sure that people suffer. The demonic
features of his advice are very, very subtle. Merchants following them
often find that they need to work on Sundays, although Bartholomew does
not explicitly suggest that, and that they are often away from home on
religious holidays, and thus unable to attend their local church.
Further, he gives advice about charity, suggesting that the merchant
give money away to reinforce his social standing. He also gives
extensive advice on how to calculate how much to give, so that it
doesn\'t cause the merchant financial problems.

This has the effect of making the merchant feel that he is doing a lot
of good by giving alms, while removing any actual virtue it has. Anyone
following Bartholomew\'s advice gives only for their own glory, and thus
earns no merit. They are sinners, but they don\'t realize that they are,
and thus they do not see the need to repent and reform. Bartholomew\'s
strategy is subtle, but it wins many souls for Hell.

Bomburkhan

**Infernal Might:** 5 (Vim)

**Characteristics:** Int --2, Per 0, Pre 0, Com 0, Str --9, Sta +1, Dex
+6, Qik +7

**Size:** --9

**Virtues and Flaws**: Weak-Willed, Short Attention Span

**Personality Traits:** Resentment of Being Controlled +5, Selfish +5,
Brave --6

**Reputations:** none

**Combat:**

Dodge: Init +7, Attack n/a, Defense +14, Damage n/a

**Soak:** +1

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1), --3 (2), --5 (3), Incapacitated (4)

**Abilities:** Athletics 5 (flying), Brawl 6 (dodge), Guile 6 (boasts)

**Powers:**

*Make a Liar of the Boastful*, 5 points, Init 0, Vim: If this imp hears
a boast and expends all of his Might points, he can immediately grant
someone nearby an Ability or Power which will contradict that boast, and
cause them to use it immediately. Thus if someone proclaims that she is
the most beautiful woman in France, Bomburkhan can immediately make
someone more beautiful than the boaster. This power must penetrate Magic
Resistance to grant the Ability or power to the person, and that talent
lasts for 1--10 rounds only (roll a simple die). A physical change, such
as the example given above, lasts until the boaster and the target can
no longer see each other.

*Insignificance*, 0 points, Init 0, Vim: No Magic, Infernal or Faerie
power can force Bomburkhan to use any of his powers.

*Misfortune*, 0 points, Init 0, Vim: As an agent of misfortune, the
presence of the demon causes the worst luck. In games of sheer chance,
the odds always favor the opponent of the imp\'s target. In other
matters where luck is more of a factor than judgement or skill, the
target receives a penalty of --2 to any rolls. This misfortune lasts
until the demon grows bored or is driven off.

*Coagulation*, 1 point, Init --1, Corpus

*Obsession*, 1 to 3 points, Init --5, Vim: Boastful

**Weakness:** Vulnerability (salt)

**Vis:** 1 pawn of Vim, in wings

**Appearance:** Bomburkhan appears as a jet-black bat, no bigger than a
person\'s hand, but with a pinched and twisted human face protruding
from the black fur.

Bomburkhan was released from Hell after the false bravado of a Crusader
led to the capture of Jerusalem. Since then he has taken great delight
in puncturing the over-inflated egos of the prideful. This demon has an
ability that could be exceedingly powerful, depending upon the magnitude
of a speaker\'s self-importance. For example, should a magus declaim
\"no-one can breach my Parma Magica!\", a nearby grog might suddenly
hurl a Pilum of Fire which slices straight through it! Fortunately for
all concerned, this power uses all of Bomburkhan\'s Might pool, and he
grows bored very easily, wandering off once his mischief is done.

Bordelon, a Personal Tormentor

**Infernal Might:** 15 (Corpus)

**Characteristics:** Int +2, Per +1, Pre 0, Com +2, Str --1, Sta 0, Dex
+3, Qik +4

**Size:** 0

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3 points)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Piercing Gaze, Puissant Leadership

**Personality Traits:** Cruel +6, Stern +5, Implacable +3

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:**

*Switch:* Init +6, Attack +11, Defense +10, Damage +4

**Soak:** +2

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Leadership 6+2 (children), Single Weapon 5 (switch)

**Powers:**

*Crushing the Will*, 2 points, Init 0, Mentem: This power saps the will
and vitality of its target, leaving him listless, less energetic and
withdrawn. All Personality Trait rolls suffer a --3 modifier, and the
target may not spend Confidence points to increase other rolls. Each use
of this power lasts until the victim has slept for at least 6 hours.

*Chastise the Disobedient*, 0 points, Init +3, Corpus: Every strike of
Bordelon\'s switch inflicts a fearsome sting. Double the wound penalties
inflicted by the weapon, although these extra penalties vanish after an
hour. Wound penalties caused by any actual wounds she inflicts are
healed as normal.

*Coagulation*, 2 points, Init --1, Corpus

*Obsession*, 1 to 3 points, Init --5, Vim: Shame

*Betrayal of the Heart*, 2 points, Init 0, Mentem: Bordelon can see into
the hearts of mankind and draw forth the most secret thoughts ---
people\'s fears and sins. Each use of this power reveals to the demon
one fact about the target to which he would never admit. Truly holy
people may be immune to this power, if they have no secrets, no matter
how petty.

*Whispers Behind the Back*, 2 points, Init 0, Mentem: Exactly as the
spell *Pains of the Perpetual Worry*, this power gives the victim a
nagging, taunting, painful emotion linked to their secret sins. It is a
recurrent sense of anxiety that their secret will be uncovered, and a
suspicion that everyone already knows it and is taking about the target
behind his back. This power lasts for a month.

**Weakness:** Protected Group (red--haired women)

**Vis:** 3 pawns of Mentem, in hair.

**Appearance:** Bordelon appears as a stern--faced old woman, with hair
tied back in such a tight bun that it distorts her face. Her small horns
are hidden within this hair. Her skin is mottled with liver--spots, and
she wears an austere gown which covers her cloven hooves and forked
tail. She affects the demeanor of a stern governess. She carries a
switch of willow bound with leather, which she wields with expert
ability to inflict the most pain.

Bordelon believes that meekness is a virtue, and that those who strive
to better themselves are victims of pride. Her goal is to crush all
ambition and prevent those whom she watches from committing the very sin
of Satan himself. Bordelon chooses a child early on in his life, and
becomes his personal tormentor (granting the Story Flaw Plagued by a
Demon). The child soon learns that the demon\'s periodic appearances are
more frequent whenever he tries to distinguish himself from his peers,
so her victims tend to become withdrawn, unambitious and meek. Whenever
her victim acts in a way that would grant a Confidence point due to
increased self-worth, he can expect a visit from Bordelon to punish the
presumption.

The Buran of Yenghissar

**Infernal Might:** 25 (Auram)

**Characteristics:** Int --5, Per 0, Pre +3, Com --2, Str na, Sta na,
Dex +3, Qik +6

**Size:** +4

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Jinni; Berserk, Strong-Willed, Wilderness Sense;
Fury (Major) (when summoned), Greater Malediction (bound by bargains),
Mute

**Personality Traits:** Untameable +5

**Reputations:** Scourge of Yenghissar 2 (local)

**Combat:** Not applicable, the buran is an insubstantial spirit

**Soak:** Not applicable, the buran is an insubstantial spirit

**Wound Penalties:** Not applicable, the buran is an insubstantial
spirit

**Abilities:** Arabic 5 (understanding)\*, Folk Ken 3 (travelers),
Theology: Islam 3 (jinn), Survival 5 (desert), Taklamakan Lore 5
(legends), Wilderness Sense 2 (weather)

\* Represents level of understanding as the spirit is Mute.

**Powers:**

*Delusion of the Desert,* 1 or 5 points, Init +3, Imaginem: This evil
spirit can create illusions of a lost traveler\'s companions or a
welcoming oasis, only to launch itself in fury at an unsuspecting
victim. Alternatively it can create images of itself as a humanoid
sandstorm with glowing fiery eyes in order to terrify its victims prior
to their deaths. A minor illusion which affects an Individual amount of
material (such as the demon itself) costs one point; a larger illusion
which fills a room costs five points. These visions always have a flaw,
however (they smell wrong, can only be seen by one target, etc.).

*Elemental Control of Wind* ; variable points; Init +1; Auram: The buran
has control over the winds of nature, which it uses to wreak destruction
on the desert fringes. It may create any Creo, Muto, or Rego effect
appropriate to Auram, at a cost of 1 Might Point per magnitude of
effect. The demon cannot create any effect with a level greater than its
Infernal Might, nor duplicate Ritual effects.

*Recalcitrance*, 0 points, Init constant, Vim: Any attempt to control
(but not destroy) the buran with any form of Supernatural Power
(magical, Divine, or otherwise) treats the demon's Might as if it were
150% its actual Might, or otherwise has its Ease Factor increased by
50%. For example, a *Circular Ward Against Demons* of 38th level is
needed to stop this demon.

**Weaknesses:** Protected Group (individuals that invoke the Bismillah
invocation)

**Vis:** 5 pawns of Auram vis prava, left behind as black sand when
dispersed.

**Appearance:** Usually manifests as a giant shapeless vortex of raging
black sand using its Auram powers. To those with Second Sight, a giant
humanoid shadow can be discerned within the sandstorm.

This wild desert storm spirit, or buran, once plagued the small village
of Yenghissar along the route to Khashgar, bringing devastation to the
crops and herd animals every seven years. It is now bound by an
Infernally-aligned sahir using the Goetic Art of Binding (see *Realms of
Power: The Infernal*, page 117). A speechless, destructive force of fury
incarnate, it rages to be released and constantly strives to create
elemental havoc around the thoughtless sahir who has trapped it within
his ancestral sword.

Unlike many other corrupt jinn, the buran lacks the *Coagulation* and
*Obsession* powers common to most demons and is an insubstantial spirit,
unable to affect the physical world except through its magic. It is an
example of an Infernal storm spirit likely to be found in the Taklamakan
Desert, although much stronger and less powerful creatures also exist
(see *The Cradle and the Crescent,* Chapter 9: On the Silk Road and
Beyond\...). Many travelers\' tales tell of companions fallen behind who
are tempted off the track by the illusions created by these demons.

Fimus, warrior demon

**Infernal Might:** 10 (Terram)

**Characteristics:** Int --2, Per +2, Pre --2, Com +2, Str +4, Sta +4,
Dex 0, Qik --4

**Size:** +2

**Virtues and Flaws:** Puissant Great Weapon; Poor Eyesight,
Simple-Minded

**Personality Traits:** Untamable +5, Intimidating +3

**Reputations:** Champion of Hell 1 (Infernal)

**Combat:**

*Cudgel:* Init --3, Attack +13, Defense +6, Damage +11

*Fist:* Init --4, Attack +6, Defense +2, Damage +4

**Soak:** +15

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--7), --3 (8--14), --5 (15--21),
Incapacitated (22--28)

**Abilities:** Athletics 3 (pursuit), Awareness 4 (foes), Brawl 5
(fist), Great Weapon 6+2 (cudgel)

**Powers:**

*Elemental Control of Earth*, variable points, Init +1, Terram: Fimus
has control over earth, which he uses to wreak destruction in the world.
He may create any Creo, Muto or Rego effect appropriate to Terram, at a
cost of 1 might point per magnitude of effect. The demon cannot create
any effect with a level greater than his Infernal Might, nor duplicate
Ritual effects. He prefers effects such as Wielding the Invisible Sling
and Rusted Decay of Ten-Score Years.

*Born of Rock*, 0 points, Init 0, Terram: The body of this demon is made
from solid rock. This makes it exceedingly heavy and almost impossible
to harm with mundane means.

*Death\'s Vengeance*, 0 points, Init +10, Terram: Upon death, this
demon\'s body explodes, sending shards of debris up to 20 paces in all
directions. Treat this as a physical attack against all within range
that can be dodged but not otherwise defended against. The Attack Bonus
is +12, and the Damage is +15.

*Coagulation*, 1 point, Init --1, Corpus

*Obsession*, 1 to 3 points, Init --5, Vim: Cowardice

*Recalcitrance*, 0 points, Init constant, Vim: Any attempt to control
(but not destroy) the demon with any form of supernatural power
(Magical, Divine or otherwise) treats the demon\'s Might as if it were
one and a half times its actual Might, or otherwise has its Ease Factor
increased by 50%. For example, a *Circular Ward Against Demons* of 30th
level is needed to stop Fimus.

**Weakness:** Abhorrent Material (Cinnamon)

**Vis:** 2 pawns of Terram, in eye.

**Appearance:** Fimus appears as an immense man apparently put together
out of boulders. He has but one eye, in the center of his forehead. He
carries an immense cudgel made out of a stalagmite.

Fimus is but one of many brother-demons (all with the same name); their
mother produces more every time she evacuates her bowels. He and his
brothers are popular foot-soldiers and shock-troops used by other
demons, because they are effective warriors, and too stupid to
effectively entertain rebellious thoughts. Each of the brothers has a
different Abhorrent Material, depending upon what their mother had been
eating prior to their birth.

Michael

**Infernal Might:** 10 (Corpus)

**Characteristics:** Int +2, Per +2, Pre --2, Com --2, Str 0, Sta 0, Dex
+1, Qik +1

**Size:** --2 to +1

**Age:** n/a (varies)

**Virtues and Flaws:** None

**Personality Traits:** Cruel +3, Wrathful +3

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:** Michael does not normally fight, and if he does he uses
whatever weapons are suitable for his current disguise.

**Soak:** +0 (unless wearing armor)

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20) (Michael always takes wounds as a Size 0
creature, even if his current Size is different.)

**Abilities:** Athletics 5 (running away), Awareness 4 (victims), Craft
(practical jokes) 8 (painful and humiliating ones), Folk Ken 5 (figuring
out what will make someone most angry), Guile 10 (pretending to be
someone else), Intrigue 3 (maneuvering people into his plots)

**Powers:**

*Change Form,* 0 points, Init +0, Corpus: Michael can change his
appearance to match that of any human being. The change includes clothes
and other equipment, as necessary.

*Coagulation*, 3 points, Init --1, Corpus

*Obsession*, 1 to 3 points, Init --5, Vim: Sensitivity to Mockery

*Working Material,* 1 point, Init +0, Terram: Michael can create
whatever he needs to set up a particular practical joke.

**Equipment:** Whatever is appropriate to his current role.

**Encumbrance:** Varies

**Weakness:** Abhorrent Material (salt)

**Vis:** 2 pawns of Muto in his heart (Infernally tainted)

**Appearance:** Michael appears as he needs to for his latest role. As a
demon, he doesn\'t need, nor does he have, a \'natural\' form.

Michael (he likes taking the name of a famous angel) is a minor demon
who tempts people to wrath. He sets up elaborate, painful, and
humiliating practical jokes, and makes sure that he is seen in the form
of one of the victim\'s friends while doing so. If possible, he ensures
that the victim sees him, in the form of the friend, laughing at their
misfortune before running away.

He normally stays around to watch the resulting confrontation, because
if it isn\'t heated enough he sets up another, even more hurtful, joke.
He is especially happy if both friends become angry, and the friendship
is ruined. Since both parties feel that the other was unreasonable,
sometimes they can nurse their anger for years, which is exactly what
Michael wants.

While Michael\'s jokes are normally painful and humiliating, they are
almost never fatal. He wants people to sin so that they damn their
souls, not die and possibly go to Heaven.

Polandrus

**Infernal Might:** 20 (Animal)

**Characteristics:** Int +1, Per +2, Pre 0, Com +2, Str +2, Sta +2, Dex
+2, Qik +3

**Size:** 0

**Age:** n/a

**Confidence Score:** 1 (3)

**Virtues and Flaws:** None

**Personality Traits:** Envious +3, Proud +2, Calculating +2

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:** Bite: Init +18, Attack +11, Defense +9, Damage +8

**Soak:** +6

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1/--1/--1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** \[Area\] Lore 3 (livestock), Bargain 7 (for sins), Brawl
5 (bite), Charm 4 (frightened people), Folk Ken 3 (peasants), Guile 8
(when making deals), Hunt 6 (livestock), Language 6 (making deals),
Leadership 4 (wolves), Survival 5 (woods)

**Powers:**

*Calm Person,* 1 point, Init +18, Mentem: Makes the target person
unnaturally calm about talking to a large wolf. It doesn\'t lessen their
fear, just the sense that it is something they should act on
immediately.

*Dominate Wolves,* 0 points, Init +18, Animal: Polandrus can establish
absolute control over any wolf. The wolf doesn\'t like it, but Polandrus
doesn\'t care. This power applies to mundane wolves, wolves with Might
scores, and to characters who can naturally take the form of a wolf,
including shapechangers, lycanthropes, skinchangers, and Bjornaer with
wolf heartbeasts, but not including magi who change using spells. Once
established, the domination lasts until Polandrus decides to drop it,
the dominated wolf enters a Dominion aura of level 3 or higher, or
someone dispels the power.

*Coagulation*, 3 points, Init --1, Animal

*Obsession*, 1 to 3 points, Init --5, Vim: Secrecy

**Equipment:** None

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Weakness:** Vulnerability (Holly)

**Vis:** 1 pawn of Animal in each of four large canine teeth, all
Infernally tainted.

**Appearance:** An extremely large, jet black wolf, with red eyes.

Polandrus targets livestock farmers. He dominates a few wolves, and then
kills some livestock, making sure that someone sees the wolves do it. A
little later, he confronts the peasant in question, offering to ensure
that the wolves do not attack for a week if the farmer does something
innocuous, such as not wear a particular tunic. Polandrus comes back
every week, and the requirements gradually become sinful, and more and
more heinous. By the end, the wolf relies more on the threat to expose
the farmer\'s deeds than on the threat to the livestock.

Polandrus is unnaturally fast in combat, much more so than in normal
situations. However, he never attacks people unless he is attacked
first.

Corrupt Beasts

Corrupt beasts can come about in a number of different ways. Some are
mundane beasts corrupted directly by the power of a demon, while others
are born corrupt after a coupling between a demon and a beast. Creatures
that dwell in an Infernal aura become corrupted by the very nature of
the area; this may only become apparent in the offspring of animals
moving into a weak Infernal aura, but is a result of Infernal Warping in
stronger auras. Certain Infernal auras may corrupt a creature overnight.
Finally, diabolists and Infernalists may have the power to create
corrupt beasts, either intentionally or as an unintended side effect of
their powers.

To create the game statistics of a Corrupt Beast, start with the
statistics of a mundane beast, and apply the Corrupted Beast Flaw.
Balance this Flaw with a Virtue, or, if the beast has been corrupted for
a long time, or was born in this state, apply more Flaws to acquire
further Virtues. Virtues and Flaws for Corrupted Beasts may only be
chosen from the accompanying list. The corpse of a corrupted beast
typically contains one pawn of vis for each five points of Might it
possessed.

Virtues and Flaws for Corrupted Beasts

Virtues: Greater Immunity, Greater Infernal Power; Ferocity, Lesser
Immunity, Lesser Infernal Power

Flaws: Horrifying Appearance; Corrupted Beast (compulsory), Demonic
Weakness, Lesser Malediction

Corrupted Beast

*Minor Supernatural Flaw, animals only*

The creature has been corrupted by Infernal power, and has acquired an
Infernal Might of 5. The negative side of its character is brought to
the fore, and it acquires one sinful Personality Trait at +6, such as
Violent, Gluttonous or Lustful. As part of the corruption, the beast
acquires some sort of disgusting or repellent appearance, decreasing its
Presence to --6. However, should the animal make any attempt to scare or
intimidate an opponent, this should be treated as a Presence of +6.
Despite this deformity, it is possible (although difficult) to pass the
animal off as a natural member of its species. Finally, the creature
acquires the Tainted with Evil Flaw which affects the reactions of both
humans and other animals towards it. Corrupted Beasts do not react
negatively to The Gift.

Demonic Weakness

*Minor Supernatural Flaw, Corrupted Beasts only*

The beast has a weakness similar to that of a demon. Corrupt Beasts
cannot have the Ordering or Compulsion Weaknesses.

Horrifying Appearance

*Major Supernatural Flaw, Corrupted Beasts only*

The creature is hideously deformed in some way, and this deformity
causes a major hindrance to its life. These deformities may have some
minor side benefit (a creature without a skeleton can seep through
cracks, for example), but prevent the animal from ever being passed off
as a member of its original species.

Example Horrifying Appearances

A pair of huge but useless wings which hang limply at the sides of the
creature\'s body.

Transparent skin, so that its organs can be seen pulsating within the
flesh.

A snake\'s body instead of hindquarters, forcing the creature to move
with a combined crawl and slither.

No internal skeleton. The beast can force itself into its original form
for short periods, but soon collapses into a puddle of hair, teeth and
claws, oozing slowly along the ground.

A head at each end of the body, or in the center of the back.

Greater Infernal Power

*Major Supernatural Virtue, Corrupted Beasts only*

Choosing this Virtue adds 5 to the Infernal Might of the Corrupt Beast.
The creature has an Infernal Power which it may activate by spending
points from its Might Pool. Design the effect as if it were a Hermetic
spell, or an Infernal Power, if you have *Realms of Power: The
Infernal*. The level of effect cannot exceed the Corrupted Beast\'s
(Infernal Might + 10). A Greater Power typically costs its magnitude in
Might points to activate, and has an Init bonus equal to Qik +
magnitude. A power is a Greater Infernal Power if it requires a
Penetration total to work. Corrupt Beasts may have this Virtue more than
once, each for a different power. Infernal Might increases for each
Power acquired.

Lesser Infernal Power

*Minor Supernatural Virtue, Corrupted Beasts only*

Choosing this Virtue adds 2 to the Infernal Might of the Corrupt Beast.
The creature has an Infernal Power which either affects it constantly or
may be activated by spending points from its Might Pool. Design the
effect as if it were a Hermetic spell, or an Infernal Power if you have
*Realms of Power: The Infernal*, but adjust the level for Constant
Effect or Maintaining Concentration if appropriate (ignoring other
Effect Modifications). The level of effect cannot exceed the Corrupted
Beast\'s Infernal Might. A Minor power typically costs 0--2 Might points
to activate, and has an Init bonus equal to magnitude. A Lesser Infernal
Power cannot have a Penetration Total; if the power would have to exceed
the Magic Resistance of a target to operate (even if they do not have
any Magic Resistance), then it is a Greater Power instead. Corrupt
Beasts may have this Virtue more than once, each for a different power.
Infernal Might increases for each Power acquired.

Demonic Steed

**Infernal Might:** 7 (Animal)

**Characteristics:** Cun --2, Per 0, Pre --6, Com --4, Str +4, Sta +4,
Dex +1, Qik +1

**Size:** +3

**Virtues and Flaws:** Enduring Constitution, Improved Characteristics,
Lesser Infernal Power\*, Long Winded; Proud; Corrupted Beast\*

\*These Virtues and Flaws are a result of its corruption

**Personality Traits:** Vain +6, Brave +1

**Combat:**

*Kick:* Init +3, Attack +7, Defense +7, Damage +5

**Soak:** +4

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0/0, /0/0, --2, --4, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--8), --3 (9--16), --5 (17--24),
Incapacitated (25--32)

**Abilities:** Athletics 5 (long-distance running), Brawl 3 (hooves)

**Powers:**

*The Unimpeded Traveler*, 0 points, Init +1, Animal: This steed is not
impeded by poor terrain, and may move at maximum speed along even the
poorest of roads, achieving 30 miles a day. It may even cross open water
and chasms, unsupported by ground, but can do this only at a trotting
pace.

**Vis:** 2 pawns of Animal, in hooves.

**Appearance:** A fearsome black stallion with bloodshot eyes, fangs in
its mouth, and hooves of iron.

This horse is one of three created by an Infernalist magus in a tribunal
at the fringes of the Order by repeated applications of a tainted
version of *Steed of Vengeance* (Muto Animal Level 35). There were many
failures before he successfully created these three corrupted beasts.
Because the spell is well-known, he is able to use the steeds in front
of other magi with impunity.

Two-Headed Hound

**Infernal Might:** 10 (Animal)

**Characteristics:** Cun 0, Per +2, Pre --6, Com 0, Str 0, Sta +2, Dex
+1, Qik +2

**Size:** 0

**Ferocity Score**: 1 (3 points)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Greater Infernal Power\*; Ferocity\* (against
intruders), Improved Characteristics, Long Winded, Sharp Ears;
Horrifying Appearance\*, Reckless; Corrupted Beast\*

\*These Virtues and Flaws are a result of its corruption

**Personality Traits:** Hatred of Owner +6, Hatred of Humans +5, Hatred
of Self +3, Reckless +3, Vigilant +1

**Combat:**

Bite: Init +2, Attack +11, Defense +10, Damage +1

**Soak:** +2

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Athletics 4 (pursuit), Awareness 4 (keeping watch), Brawl
6 (bite), Hunt 4 (track by scent)

**Powers:**

*Spit Fire*, 4 points, Init +6, Ignem: The hound may spit a bolt of fire
at its opponents; which does +15 damage to the individual it hits. The
creature may bite one opponent and spit fire at another in the same
round.

**Vis:** 2 pawns of Vim, one in each head.

**Appearance:** This huge dog has two slavering heads protruding from
its massive shoulders. The two heads are cursed with independent minds
which clearly hate each other and would like nothing more than to bite
the other; it is only because the hound\'s necks are too short that it
cannot. The dog is covered in gray fur in the few areas which are not
affected by mange, which has left patches of puffy, purulent red flesh.

This corrupted beast was created by a diabolist to be a guard for his
sanctum. He controls it with an Infernal charm, but is fearful of the
day that this charm fails, for he knows that the dog hates him.

Creatures of the Divine

Creatures with Divine Might use the normal rules for determining Magic
Resistance, Penetration, and whether their powers can be dispelled.
Although they are acting on behalf of God, they are not direct
interventions by the deity, and thus are not omnipotent.

Creatures with Divine Might cannot have True Faith. That blessing is
limited to beings who are not already part of the Divine Realm.

Creatures with Divine Might are never bothered by The Gift. They judge
people based on their actions and hearts, not on the powers that they
might have. If you decide that magic is inherently sinful, they are
inclined against magi, but because of their sins, not because of The
Gift. Specific Flaws (such as Offensive to Divine Beings and Unbearable
to Divine Beings) that modify or simulate the effects of The Gift may
cause creatures with Divine Might to react negatively to the character
with the Flaw, although Magical Air does not. Such Flaws, and
encounters, are not common enough for anyone in Mythic Europe to wonder
why.

Angelic Powers

All angels possess the following powers:

*Angelic Mantle*, 2 points, +12, Corpus: Angels use this power to
manifest in the mundane world and appear to take on mortal flesh. In
reality, this form is entirely formed from their intellect, but appears
and acts exactly like real flesh. While in this "material" form, they
must follow the mundane world's natural laws, and so are limited, with
Characteristic and Soak scores, and Fatigue and Wound levels. Although
angels are genderless, their Mantles normally do have a gender; while in
their Mantle, angels may breed, and sire or bear children (although no
angel has done so since the flood), although they do not age. If they
are "killed" while in their Mantle, they return to their spiritual form,
but may if they chose (and have the necessary Might Points) immediately
use this power again. An angel's Mantle may appear as anything.

*Enfolding*, 2 or 10 points, +10, Vim: When the pious are in danger or
torment, the angel may grant them comfort, imparting a moment of peace
and mercy. This power renders the target's soul wholly safe and
protected for a short time. While Enfolded the target's soul (and mind)
may not be targeted by any supernatural power of any kind. This power
only lasts for a few scant moments, but for the target it is timeless
and can seem to stretch to a lifetime. An angel may also Enfold a
person's body (costing 10 Might points), rendering them completely
invulnerable to magic, pain, damage, fatigue, wounds, or death, although
this power only lasts for a very short period of time (no longer than
one combat round). This power is most often used on a member of the
faithful who is about to be martyred or suffer terribly.

*Envisioning*, 1 or 5 points, +0, *Mentem*: This power allows angels to
appear in the dreams of a target, or even while awake, and impart a
Divine message. This is different to a miraculous vision, which occurs
through direct Divine agency. An Envisioning that takes place while the
target is awake costs five points and may seem like a daydream, or a
vivid or frightening vision, depending on what message the angel
intends. Anyone may be the target of Envisioning, pious and impious,
pagan and infernalist. Envisioning may occur over any distance.

Gabriel, the Archangel of Prophecy

Say (O Muhammad, to mankind): Who is an enemy to Jibril! For he it is
who hath revealed (this Scripture) to thy heart by Allah's leave,
confirming that which was (revealed) before it, and a guidance and glad
tidings to believers.

*---Qur'an* 2:97

**Divine Might:** 100 (Mentem)

**Characteristics:** Int +10, Per +10, Pre +10, Com +10, Str +8, Sta +8,
Dex +8, Qik +8

**Size:** 0

**Age:** n/a

**Confidence Score:** 7 (50)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Good Teacher, Inspirational

**Personality Traits:** Compassionate +3, Intellectual +3, Just +3, Love
of God +5, Patient +3

**Reputations:** Messenger of God 5, among Jews, Christians and Muslims

**Combat:** Fist: Init +8, Attack +19, Defense +19, Damage +8

**Soak:** +8

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0/0/0, --1/--1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Awareness 10 (the uneducated), Charm 10 (pupils), Brawl
10 (fist), Leadership 10 (calling attention), Teaching 15 (Theology),
All knowledge at a score of 15

**Powers:**

*Enlighten,* variable, Init +0, Mentem: Gabriel can implant any
Knowledge into the mind of another, at a cost of 1 Might for every
experience point implanted. He may not give any character knowledge that
takes their Ability score over 15.

*Spirit Form,* 0 points, Init +30, Vim: Gabriel can become a creature of
pure spirit as he wishes. This means that he is unable to affect things
physically, or be affected physically.

*Subtle Form,* 0 points, Init +0, Corpus: Gabriel can change his
appearance to look like any human being. His statistics do not change.

**Equipment:** Robes

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Vis:** 20 pawns of Mentem in head.

**Appearance:** Gabriel usually takes the form of a compassionate,
gentle man, sometimes with wings growing from his shoulders or arms.

More approachable and intellectually-minded than his fellows, the
Archangel Gabriel (Jibril or Jabra'il in Islam) is the chief messenger
of God, best known for his teaching of the prophet Daniel, his
announcing of the incarnation of Christ to the Virgin Mary and his
bringing of the revelation of the *Qur'an* to Muhammad, for whom he also
acted as a constant counsellor. He may be encountered by characters who
are seeking wisdom, particularly if this wisdom is of a religious
nature. He is most likely to be encountered in the form described here;
in his natural form he is a 600-winged figure who is large enough to
stand astride the horizon.

Kolazonta, the Chastiser

...our father Aaron, armed with the censer, ran through the multitude of
the people and conquered the fiery angel...

*4 Maccabees 7:11*

**Divine Might:** 30 (Ignem)

**Characteristics:** Int +3, Per +3, Pre +3, Com +3, Str +2, Sta +5, Dex
+1, Qik +1

**Size:** 0

**Confidence Score:** 2 (15)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Greater Immunity (Fire)

**Personality Traits:** Love of God +5, Grim +4, Remorseless +3

**Reputations:** Scourge of the Impious 3, amongst Jews.

**Combat:**

*Flaming Fist\*:* Init +1, Attack +6, Defense +6, Damage +7

\* This fire is natural and ignores Magic Resistance, although not Soak
from Arts.

**Soak:** +5

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Brawl 4 (fists), Dominion Lore 6 (angels), Theology 6
(sin)

**Powers:**

*Chastise the Sinful*, 5 points, +1, Corpus: As *Curse of the
Unportended Plague*.

*Cloud form*, 0 points, +30, Auram: Can take on the form of a cloud at
will, making him immune to all physical attacks (although he may be
targeted by Auram spells).

*Fiery Form*, 0 points, +30, Ignem: May become a fiery man at will,
doing +5 damage to anyone that approaches within 5 feet.

**Equipment:** None.

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Vis:** 4 pawns Corpus throughout body, 2 pawns Ignem in veins.

**Appearance:** Kolazonta most often appears as a dark, ominous cloud,
but may rarely manifest as a man made of white fire, with veins of flame
and eyes of lightning.

Kolazonta is one of the angels tasked by the lord to chastise His
faithful for their failings, and as such he is a servant of Uriel, the
Angel of Punishment. Kolazonta was the angel who brought the plague upon
the Israelites (in Numbers 16:46--50) for rebelling against Moses. Aaron
defeated Kolazonta after Moses told him the punishment was lifted.
Kolazonta is a grim angel who executes the chastisement of the Lord
without fear or favor. He is often present amidst armies or cities under
siege, waiting for the Lord's command to inflict a plague upon the
sinful.

Lupersus

**Divine Might:** 20 (Animal)

**Characteristics:** Int 0, Per +3, Pre +3, Com --2, Str +2, Sta +3, Dex
+1, Qik +2

**Size:** --1

**Age:** n/a

**Confidence Score:** 1 (6)

**Virtues and Flaws:** None

**Personality Traits:** Loyal +3, Patient +2, Helpful +2

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:** *Bite:* Init +8, Attack +11, Defense +16, Damage +8

**Soak:** +7

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0/0/0/0/0/0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--4), --3 (5--8), --5 (9--12), Incapacitated
(13--16)

**Abilities:** Area Lore 5 (food sources), Awareness 5 (threats to his
charge), Brawl 4 (bite), Divine Lore 5 (saints), Hunt 8 (rabbits),
Stealth 8 (hiding from humans), Survival 8 (hills)

**Powers:**

*Perfect Defender,* 1 point, Init +20, Animal: If Lupersus is acting as
a defender to another character in combat, he can use this power to get
a +10 bonus to Defense for the duration of the combat. For these
purposes, the combat lasts until Lupersus is disengaged.

**Equipment:** None

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Vis:** 4 pawns of Animal, in the whole body.

**Appearance:** A silver-gray wolf, with a noble bearing. No matter what
terrain he runs through, Lupersus never gets dirty.

Lupersus has been sent by God to guard a holy hermit, provide him with
food, and, occasionally, lead those in need of advice to the hermit who
can provide it. He cannot speak, and has no wish to do so. While his
main focus is on the hermit, Lupersus is generally compassionate, and
helps those in trouble whom he finds within his range. Sometimes he
leads them to safety, but most people do not trust a wolf. In those
cases, he chases them to safety. Lupersus is not an angel, but rather a
divine creature, and does not have the powers shared by all angels.

Nasir, the Helper

As I was unable to walk, I climbed the mountain on horseback, while its
slopes were all covered with pieces of stone and pebbles which slipped
backwards under the feet of the horse every time its hoofs struck them
\[\...\] It slipped backward, with the pebbles and chips of stone
sliding under it, and fell. So I dismounted, assisted the horse to its
feet and stopped, unable to move. At that moment a man came down to me
from the mountain and held me by the hand, my other hand holding the
pack horse, until he got me to the summit. No, by Allah, I did not know
who the man was and never saw him again. \[\...\] He was none other than
an angel whom Allah, moved by compassion toward me, sent to my aid.

Usama ibn Munqidh (d. 1188), *The Book of Learning by Example*

**Divine Might:** 25 (Corpus)

**Characteristics:** Int +2, Per +2, Pre +2, Com +2, Str 0, Sta +1, Dex
+2, Qik +2

**Size:** 0

**Age:** n/a (33)

**Confidence Score:** 2 (10)

**Virtues and Flaws:** Ways of the (Local Environment); Animal Ken,
Wilderness Sense

**Personality Traits:** Compassionate +3, Just +3, Love of God +5

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:** *Fist:* Init +2, Attack +8, Defense +8, Damage +0

**Soak:** +1

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties:** --1 (1--5), --3 (6--10), --5 (11--15),
Incapacitated (16--20)

**Abilities:** Animal Handling 8 (horses), Animal Ken 8 (horses),
Athletics 8 (climbing), Awareness 8 (natural hazards), Brawl 5 (fist),
Chirurgy 8 (bind wound), Dominion Lore 8 (angels), Swim 8 (rough water),
Theology 8 (angelology), Wilderness Sense 8 (local environment)

**Powers:**

*Calming Touch,* 3 points, Init +0, Animal/Mentem: By touching the
target, Nasir can calm their fears, making them feel reassured in the
face of dangerous terrain.

*Spirit Form,* 0 points, Init +30, Vim: Nasir can become a creature of
pure spirit as he wishes. This means that he is unable to affect things
physically, or be affected physically.

*Steadying Hand,* 5 points, Init +30, Animal/Corpus: By touching the
target, Nasir can assure that their footsteps are firm and that they can
cross the most impassable of terrain. The target will not slip or fall
as long as contact is maintained.

*Subtle Form,* 0 points, Init +0, Corpus: Nasir can change his
appearance to look like any human being. His statistics do not change.

**Equipment:** Travelling clothes

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Vis:** 4 pawns of Terram in feet.

**Appearance:** An unassuming man dressed in well-worn travelling
clothes.

Nasir is a minor angel charged with the safety of pious travellers. He
spends most of his time helping those in need, seeming to appear by
mundane means from just out of sight, providing what aid he can, and
then leaving again before he can be questioned too closely about his
origins.

Seferiel

**Divine Might:** 50 (Corpus)

**Characteristics:** Int +5, Per +5, Pre +5, Com +5, Str +5, Sta +5, Dex
+5, Qik +5

**Size:** +1

**Age:** n/a (30)

**Confidence Score:** 3 (18)

**Virtues and Flaws:** None

**Personality Traits:** Just +3, Love of God +5, Curious +2, Merciful +2

**Reputations:** None

**Combat:** *Flaming Greatsword:* Init +18, Attack +21, Defense +18,
Damage +25 (Note that both the greatsword and the fire are natural,
because God made them that way, and thus not magically resisted.)

**Soak:** +20

**Fatigue levels:** OK, 0/0/0/0/0/0, --1, --3, --5, Unconscious

**Wound Penalties**: --1 (1--6), --3 (7--12), --5 (13--18),
Incapacitated (19--24)

**Abilities:** Awareness 5 (casting magic), Charm 3 (magi), Divine Lore
10 (angels), Great Weapon 7 (greatsword), Leadership 7 (magi), Magic
Theory 10 (theological implications), Order of Hermes Lore 10
(interactions with the Church), Theology 10 (angelology)

**Powers:**

*Magic,* 1 or more points, Init +18, by effect: Seferiel can duplicate
any effect of Hermetic magic, at a cost of 1 Might Point for every two
magnitudes of the Hermetic effect. There is no limit, other than his
remaining Might Pool, on the number of points he can spend on a single
effect. This includes ritual effects, for which he needs neither vis nor
long periods of time.

*Spirit Form,* 0 points, Init +30, Vim: Seferiel can become a creature
of pure spirit as he wishes. This means that he is unable to affect
things physically, or be affected physically.

*Subtle Form,* 0 points, Init +0, Corpus: Seferiel can change his
appearance to look like any human being. His statistics do not change.

**Equipment:** Shining white robes, flaming greatsword

**Encumbrance:** 0 (0)

**Vis:** 10 pawns of Ignem in the sword.

**Appearance:** A large man, with golden-tinged skin and burning-bright
hair, dressed in a white robe that shines like the stars. He carries a
burning greatsword.

Seferiel is an angel with special responsibility for Hermetic magi. Most
of the time, he seeks to draw them closer to God, but sometimes he acts
as the instrument of God\'s vengeance against those who are particularly
wicked. His attitude depends slightly on whether magic is inherently
sinful in your saga; his suggested courses of action depend on this more
strongly. However, either way he likes Hermetic magi, in general, and
finds them fascinating people. He often pretends to be a magus in order
to get to know people better, and find out what they are really like.

Seferiel sometimes takes an interest in a particular magus, one whom he
sees has great potential, and is a suitable antagonist for the Plagued
by Angel Story Flaw. His divinely-appointed mission is, however, to the
Order as a whole, and he travels across Europe to bring God\'s message
to as many magi as possible.
