Mythic Europe

The official setting for Ars Magica is Mythic Europe, a world very like
the middle ages of our world, but with magic. For many people, this
setting is a large part of the fun of the game. You can \'change
history\', or at least \'visit\' historical places. When you save a
country from demons, you\'ve saved France, not some imaginary land.
It\'s also possible to actually visit the place where your saga is set,
although that\'s easier for European players.

However, some players and storyguides can find this a little
intimidating. There is no need for this. The most important thing to
remember is that it is a *game:* it is supposed to be fun. If historical
accuracy is spoiling your fun, you need less of it. Any way you enjoy
playing the game counts as playing it \'properly\'. The second thing to
remember is that this chapter contains all the history you need to play
the game in Mythic Europe. There is, of course, a lot more history out
there, but none of it is necessary for play.

The reason for the historical setting is that it is fun to pretend that
you are involved in history. If that isn\'t fun for your troupe, you
should consider playing in a non-historical setting (see page @@).

Un-Fun History

Medieval European society was not a liberal, tolerant, or pleasant place
to live. It was thoroughly misogynist and patriarchal, and democracy was
generally regarded as an evil custom that would destroy society. While
the period is rightly notorious for its anti-Semitism, it is important
to remember that Judaism was the most *tolerated* minority religion in
almost all areas covered by Ars Magica. We have not chosen the game's
setting because we think it is a society that is worth emulating, or one
in which we would like to live.

If your troupe finds medieval society sufficiently off-putting, you
might want to play in a non-historical setting. On the other hand, you
might like the general idea, but find particular elements unpalatable.
In that case, there is no problem with glossing over or removing those
features of medieval society. If you want the Church to silently
tolerate surviving pagan cults in rural villages, go for it. That could
have relatively little impact, without straining suspension of disbelief
too much. If you want to introduce gender equality you will have to do
more work, but it might be as simple as declaring that England is
currently ruled by Queen Henrietta III, rather than King Henry III.

On the other hand, you might enjoy playing characters who have to face
the challenges created by an oppressive culture. It can be a lot of fun
to play the resistance, as the popularity of a certain fictional
universe including knights with shining swords proves. The Order of
Hermes is deliberately designed to be anachronistic and fundamentally
tolerant, so that your troupe's home covenant can be as liberal as you
like, if you would have more fun with a safe home base for your
characters.

The material published for Ars Magica 5^th^ Edition stays close to the
facts about medieval society, but your troupe does not have to. Discuss
what you would, collectively, find most fun, and develop that consensus
as you play so that everyone enjoys playing in the game world, even if
they would certainly not want to live there.

Making it Historical

If you are playing a historical roleplaying game, you want the stories
to feel historical. You should not attempt to do this by avoiding
errors, because mood is better set by positive, obvious features of the
story, rather than by omissions. Thus, you should include historical
features and make them an important part of the story.

Some aspects of this are both easy and obvious. There are castles, and
knights riding around in armor. However, these features of the
environment do not distinguish Mythic Europe from many generic fantasy
settings. If you want the game to feel properly medieval, rather than
vaguely medieval, you need to do a bit more.

One possibility is to introduce known historical figures. The main
problem with this is that most players will only have heard of the most
famous medieval figures, generally kings and saints, and it can spoil
suspension of disbelief if they show up all the time. On the other hand,
if your saga is set in northern Italy a little before the canonical date
it is entirely realistic to have St Francis of Assisi wander past every
so often. Still, it is unwise to rely on famous medieval people
entirely. If your players have more background knowledge on the period,
less famous figures might work just as well, and you could make several
historical figures into recurring NPCs.

A second possibility is to have the characters turn up at famous
historical events. This suffers from some of the same problems as using
historical characters, and has an additional potential problem. If you
decide that you want the course of history in your saga to match the
course of recorded history, you will have to stop the player characters
changing anything. This is, in general, a bad way to write stories.

Another approach is to make distinctively medieval things central to a
story. This is much easier than it sounds, for two reasons. First, you
only need to find out one thing for each story. For example, you might
learn that medieval people went on frequent pilgrimages to saints\'
tombs, and then build a story around a pilgrimage. You don\'t need to
know about the rest of the cult of saints, because those other aspects
do not matter to your story. Second, by putting something obviously
medieval on center stage, you draw attention to that, and away from the
areas where you are making things up as you go along.

You can use any area of medieval culture for this, but you should pick
something that you find independently interesting. Once you have found
an interesting fact, you have to work it into a story. This does not
mean that the thing should turn up, and that you then lecture the
players about it. Instead, the course of the story should depend, in
some way, on the thing that you have discovered.

Some discoveries are easier to incorporate than others. For example,
there was a significant tendency for people to try to steal relics from
shrines, so that they could have the holiness for themselves. This is
easy to incorporate; the story can just be about a relic thief, and the
NPCs simply mention that such thefts are not uncommon. Similarly,
features of the laws and systems of justice can easily be worked into a
story centered around a court case.

It seems harder to incorporate details of medieval diet into a story,
but it is not impossible. For example, the nobility ate meat with nearly
every meal, as a sign of status. So, have a nobleman arrange to visit
the covenant, and then have an enemy curse the covenant so that their
meat stocks all turn rotten, as does any new meat they bring in. If the
covenant cannot lift the curse, they will have to feed the nobleman
vegetables, and he will be insulted.

For some aspects of social history, the best way to incorporate them is
to create an NPC around that fact, and then have the NPC play a central
role in at least one story. For example, it was common for widows to
take over and continue their husbands\' businesses, but many businessmen
regarded such women with a degree of hostility. A widow could,
therefore, seek the covenant\'s help.

A final option is to spend some time reading medieval legends and
stories, and then to create stories based on them. Many medieval legends
are available in inexpensive English translations, and some are
extremely easy to convert into stories.

The main body of this chapter, and other Ars Magica products, contain a
large number of such aspects of medieval history, along with explicit
suggestions for how to turn them into stories. It is entirely possible
to create a saga with a very medieval tone without buying any books that
are not part of the Ars Magica line.

Some storyguides might worry that their players will not appreciate just
how medieval some of the things they incorporate are, but this is
unlikely to be a problem. If the players know that you are trying to
incorporate genuine medieval history, they are likely to take it on
trust that the person they have just met had real medieval counterparts,
and thus when the events of the saga differ from the assumptions of
generic medieval fantasy they will know that this is because of genuine
historical flavor.

In addition, it is not at all uncommon for players of Ars Magica to
start reading a bit about the middle ages. If your players do so, they
will find that they come across things that have already featured in the
saga. This will impress them with your erudition, and with the
historical feel that the game has.

The Order of Hermes

The Order of Hermes is completely ahistorical. It has no basis
whatsoever in medieval history or myth. (The magical traditions
described in supplements such as *Rival Magic* and *Hedge Magic Revised
Edition* are, in many cases, much more closely grounded in medieval
beliefs.) Its magi are also unbelievably powerful. Why does the rest of
Mythic Europe look so similar to the real world?

The real answer is "because we want to play a game about powerful
wizards in medieval Europe". We therefore gloss over inconsistencies.
The Code of Hermes is designed to help with suspension of disbelief on
this point, and it is reasonable for players to simply assume that it
successfully stops magi from interfering and changing the course of
history.

Of course, there is nothing to stop you from allowing the player magi in
your saga to make major changes, and indeed there is a whole supplement,
*Transforming Mythic Europe*, devoted to ways in which they can do
exactly that.

Pieces of History

The following sections cover the Mythic European setting, concentrating
on the more historical, or historically legendary, aspects. The Realms
and Bestiary chapters provide some more ideas on the purely fantastic
aspects of the setting. This is not a history text. It is generalized to
the point that nothing in this section was exactly true of any part of
medieval Europe, and there are some places where the generalizations
didn\'t apply at all. If you want more specific and accurate history for
a particular area, there are several Tribunal books available for Ars
Magica 5^th^ Edition.

Further, this is not a narrative history of medieval Europe. Such things
are easily available in encyclopedias, if you want to read them.
However, the sorts of details that are useful for adding historical
flavor to a role-playing game are not the sorts of details that are
necessarily easy to find.

The information given in this section is most accurate for 1220, the
\'official\' date for Ars Magica. Using it will give your saga the feel
of something happening between about 1000 and 1400, which is likely to
be good enough to most troupes.

Medieval Physics

Modern science is not true of Mythic Europe. The world is a sphere, but
it is stationary at the center of the universe, and the stars and
planets, including the sun, are carried around it on great spheres. The
lowest of these, the Lunar Sphere, is also the limit of the power of
Hermetic magic. There are differences at a more immediate level, as
well. Diseases are caused by imbalances in the four humors, not by
infectious micro-organisms. An object in motion tends to come to a halt
unless a force makes it continue moving. Worms and flies arise
spontaneously from non-living matter. These questions are discussed in
detail in *Art & Academe,* which also provides rules for medicine and
the feats of experimental philosophers.

Beyond Western Europe

The information in this chapter is focused on Western Europe --- the
region ruled by Christians who recognised the Pope as the head of the
Church on earth. This is a diverse area already, but there is a lot more
to Mythic Europe, and supplements have covered it in more detail.
*Realms of Power: The Divine* includes more information on Christianity,
and also on Islam and Judaism. *Against the Dark* and *The Sundered
Eagle* offer information about Eastern Europe, and the Orthodox Church.
*The Cradle and the Crescent* covers the Middle East, while *Between
Sand & Sea* and *Lands of the Nile* cover North Africa, as far south as
Ethiopia.

The Church

The Church is probably the quickest and easiest way to give medieval
flavor to your saga. Christianity influenced every aspect of life in
medieval Europe in a way that\'s hard to even imagine today, and does
not feature in most fantasy settings. Almost everybody, including most
Hermetic magi, is a Christian, and the overwhelming majority of
Christians believe that the Church is essential to their religion.

The fact that the medieval Church is, after some changes, still around
as the Roman Catholic Church means that you have to be a bit careful
about offending people when using it in your sagas. Over its history the
Church, both clergy and laity, has had periods when it was more true to
Christian ideals, and periods when it was less so, and at all periods
members of the Church have run the full gamut from sinners to saints.
You will need to decide what sort of atmosphere prevails in your game,
although you should keep in mind that, unless you change the game
mechanics, the Church is backed by the Divine, which puts limits on how
corrupt it can be. In the end, the best way to avoid giving offense is
probably to portray rounded characters, rather than stereotypes at
either extreme.

Much more information about the Church is available in *The Church.*

Doctrine

There is one God, eternal and unchanging, who created the world from
nothing and sustains it from moment to moment. This God is three
persons, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. The Son became a human being
as Jesus Christ, an event called the Incarnation, which is considered
the most important event in history. Jesus Christ died on the cross, the
Crucifixion, and by his death paid the penalty for all the sins
committed by human beings. On the third day, he rose from the dead, in
the Resurrection, and forty days later he ascended to heaven.

In the beginning, God created two humans, Adam and Eve, and placed them
in the Garden of Eden. There, they were tempted by Satan and sinned, and
this Original Sin tainted all of their descendants. Where once all of
nature had served humankind, now it turned against them. Human beings in
Original Sin can do nothing truly good, because their motives are always
tainted. Baptism washes away that stain, and fits a person to receive
God\'s grace, which grants the ability to do good.

Good acts are those which accord with God\'s will, and tend to His
glory, while evil acts are those which do not. The seven deadly sins are
the basic roots of almost all sins committed by human beings, and the
Church warns against them in particular. They are Avarice, Envy, Greed,
Lust, Pride, Sloth, and Wrath. On the other side, there are the three
theological virtues: Faith, Hope, and Love, and the greatest of these is
Love.

All humans have an immortal soul, created at some point before birth.
(In 1220, theologians still disagree about when.) After death, the soul
is judged by God. Those who die perfect, having done penance for all
their sins, pass directly into heaven. Those who die penitent, but not
yet perfect, pass to purgatory, where they do penance after death for
all those sins remaining. Those who die impenitent are condemned to hell
for eternity.

Game Use: Doctrine

The deadly sins and theological virtues make excellent Personality
Traits for medieval-themed characters. Beyond that, the issues covered
by this section are rarely likely to come into play in sagas, which is
probably as it should be.

Magic and Sin

One question that is not decided by the core rules of Ars Magica is
whether magic is sinful in itself. It is clear that it can be used for
sinful purposes, and lends itself well to all seven deadly sins, but it
can also be used for good ends. If magic is inherently sinful, casting a
spell is sinful no matter what the purpose.

The choice you make here affects the possible relationships between the
magi and the Divine. If magic is inherently sinful, saints and angels
will always encourage magi to abandon it. This creates a strong tension,
and so works best if interactions with the Church are rare. It does not
mean that the Divine is always hostile, as the world is full of sinners,
and magic, in itself, is not necessarily a particularly serious sin.

If magic is not inherently sinful, magi could have close, and good,
relations with the Church, saints, and angels, with occasional concerns
over sins the magi committed using magic. In this case, giving up magic,
whether temporarily or permanently, is a suitable penance in itself;
giving up a sin can never be a penance, because it is required anyway.

Sacraments

The life of the Church is structured around the seven sacraments. Most
of these mark important stages of life, but the most important of the
sacraments, the Mass, is devoted solely to man\'s relationship with God.

Baptism is the first of the sacraments. It involves literally or
symbolically immersing someone in water, while announcing that you are
baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Baptism
washes away the stain of original sin, and is generally essential for
salvation. Baptism can be performed by anyone, even a non-Christian, and
even someone who gets the process wrong, as long as they intend to be
performing a Christian baptism.

In 1220 there is theological uncertainty as to the fate of babies who
die unbaptized, so the Church has many procedures in place to ensure
that children are baptized as soon as possible after birth. Baptism
should be performed by a priest if at all possible, but in an emergency
anyone, as noted above, may do it. As a result, Jews are just about the
only unbaptized people in Mythic Europe.

Confirmation marks a person\'s desire to be united with the Church on
earth, when he re-affirms the promises made on his behalf at baptism.
This is supposed to take place at the age of reason, seven years old,
but often does not. Confirmation can only be administered by a bishop or
a priest specially designated as his representative, and, ideally, only
after examining the candidate to ensure that he understands the
Christian faith. These requirements make it hard for most medieval
people to get a proper confirmation, so there are a substantial number
of people who have never been confirmed. In particular, most Christian
magi have not been, unless they or their parens are particularly pious.

Marriage marks the start of a family, and is another sacrament that
doesn\'t need any Church representative. A man and a woman marry by
declaring that they are married to each other, as long as they are both
old enough (over twelve for a woman, fourteen for a man), neither is
already married, and they are not too closely related. Marriage is for
life, and cannot be dissolved. The Pope occasionally issues annulments,
but these merely recognize that the marriage never actually took place.

Although no ceremony is required for marriage, the Church strongly
encourages people to have a public ceremony involving a priest. Apart
from anything else, this helps to head off later arguments over whether
there really was a marriage. It would be extremely rare for a couple to
get married with no ceremony or celebration at all.

Extreme Unction is the final sacrament, given just before death. For
this reason, it draws the most ambiguous attitude of any sacrament.
While it is generally believed to ease the passage to heaven, many
people believe that, if you have received it, you are dead to the world
in some sense, and must enter a monastery if you recover (see the
Viaticarus Flaw, page @@). Similarly, people are often reluctant to
receive it, as that means admitting that they are about to die, and
Church doctrine is absolutely clear that it is not necessary for
salvation. Extreme Unction can only be administered by a priest.

Ordination is the sacrament that turns a man into a priest, or other
member of orders. There are two main classes of orders: minor orders,
and major orders. The minor orders are doorkeeper, lector, exorcist, and
acolyte. The major, or holy, orders, are sub-deacon, deacon, priest, and
bishop. Men in holy orders may not marry, or have a living wife, whereas
men in minor orders are much less restricted. All ordained men take the
tonsure, which involves shaving the crown of the head, leaving a ring of
hair.

Penance is the sacrament that responds to sin. Christians are required
to confess all their sins to a priest, who then assigns a penance if he
is convinced that the sinner has truly repented. The penance is
something of some difficulty, which the penitent sinner performs to show
that his repentance is genuine. It does not purchase forgiveness; that
was bought by Christ\'s death. Instead, it allows the penitent to renew
his respect for God in a concrete way. Common penances involve saying a
certain number of prayers or psalms, giving charity or helping the poor
in some other way, or going on a pilgrimage to a shrine, at a distance
depending on the severity of the sin.

Priests are not allowed to mention what they hear in confession to
anyone, not even their superiors in the Church. The contents of
confession are between the priest, the penitent, and God.

In the Mass, God Himself becomes manifest in bread and wine, which is
shared with the congregation. In most of Europe, the laity now only
receive the bread, but in a few places the custom of receiving both
bread and wine persists. The bread becomes the body of Christ, known as
the Host, and the wine becomes His Blood, so that the Mass symbolizes
the sacrifice of Christ for the salvation of all believers, and the
participation of all believers in that sacrifice.

Actually receiving the bread is known as taking communion, and a person
must confess and do penance before doing so. (For large penances, a
sincere intent to complete it suffices.) As a result, most people only
take communion once a year, at Easter, although they attend the service
most weeks.

Because the consecrated bread and wine are extremely holy, they must be
consumed completely during the service, with great care taken not to
spill or drop any.

Hermetic Magic and the Sacraments

Magi can observe the supernatural effects of the Sacraments, and it is
common knowledge within the Order that the Sacraments are supernatural
Divine powers. For example, a baptismal name cannot be used as a
Sympathetic Connection to aid Penetration (unlike a birth name), Mass
does indeed change simple bread and wine into something Divine, and
bodies that have received Extreme Unction cannot be affected by magic
for three days.

Due to this overwhelming evidence of the Divine, most magi believe in
the existence of God, and many would describe themselves as Christians.
However, even a magus who identifies himself as Christian would almost
certainly be considered by the Church to have a heretical view of the
world, colored as it will be by the magus' knowledge of the
supernatural.

Game Use: Sacraments

The sacraments are as central a part of modern Catholicism, and many
other contemporary varieties of Christianity, as they were of the
medieval Church. Thus, a certain degree of care should be taken to avoid
offending people. That said, they are a central part of medieval life,
and thus make good stories.

A number of covenfolk decide that they want to be confirmed; living at
the covenant, they have previously had no opportunity. This means taking
them to the bishop, and getting them through the catechism without
painting the covenant as a hive of heretics.

A moderately pious magus decides to confess and take communion after
several lapsed years. The (knowledgeable) confessor assigns a pilgrimage
to a distant shrine, without using magic at all, as a penance.

The covenfolk find out that Hermetic magic, or, indeed, any other magic,
is completely incapable of affecting the Host in any way. They form a
fraternity devoted to honoring the Host as God\'s presence on earth. (In
1220, this is unusual, but not heretical. Later, it becomes common and
absolutely orthodox.)

Someone born at the covenant becomes deeply pious, but some power seems
to be driving him out of churches, and he has ominous warning dreams in
which he is overwhelmed by great waves. It turns out that he was never
baptized, and the dreams are to encourage him to do so.

The unbaptized pious character dies without working out the problem.
After his death, a close friend has visions revealing that he is damned
to hell, and why, warning them to ensure that everyone is baptized. This
could launch a quest for a way to baptize the character posthumously.
(This has happened before. At the earnest request of Pope Gregory the
Great, later a saint, God allowed the Roman Emperor Trajan to be saved
after death. But God did warn the Pope not to ask such things again.)

Saints

Saints are people who served God faithfully when alive, and have now
died and joined the Church Triumphant in heaven. (Living Christians are
often called the Church Militant, as they must still fight temptation
and the wiles of the devil.) Strictly speaking, angels are not saints,
as they are not and never were human, but the archangels Michael and
Gabriel are often treated as saints.

The importance of saints for living Christians is that they are willing
to intercede with God on behalf of the living, and while they have no
power of their own, God is willing to listen to them. The most important
saint, by far, is the Virgin Mary, the mother of God, who is believed to
have particularly strong influence. After her come the twelve Apostles,
Christ\'s closest followers during His ministry on earth, and
particularly St Peter, the first Bishop of Rome and the rock on which
the Church was built. St Paul, called the Apostle to the Gentiles, is of
almost equal importance. There are many other saints, including the
saints of the Old Testament, such as Abraham, Moses, and David, martyrs,
who were killed for their faith, and witnesses, who bore witness to
God\'s message in particularly impressive ways.

The Church is, in 1220, moving towards an official list of recognized
saints, although the process is not yet complete. Further, the Church
recognizes that there are many saints in heaven who are not on the
Church\'s list. The list includes only those saints that the Church is
sure about, which means that they lived a clearly holy life, and that
miracles have been attributed to their intercession after death.

Saints often take an interest in a particular area of life or
institution, reflecting their interests when they were alive, and
petitions addressed to the saint tend to be more effective in that area.
Similarly, saints are particularly attentive to their relics, physical
objects that were closely associated with the saint in life, most often
bodies or body parts. The faithful often make long pilgrimages to pray
at a shrine containing the relics of a particularly important or
appropriate saint.

This, however, moves into tricky territory. Strictly speaking, no-one
worships saints, and the requests for intercession addressed to them are
to be distinguished from the prayers offered directly to God. In
practice, most people are rather fuzzy on the difference, and the Church
doesn\'t mind, as long as the faithful accept that the Church\'s
doctrine, which they don\'t fully understand, is correct. God does not
require all His children to be expert theologians.

Game Use: Saints

Saints are an excellent medium for divine intervention in a saga. First,
most medieval stories of divine activity involve a saint as mediator, so
this choice keeps medieval flavor. Further, there are many saints, some
quite local and obscure, and they all have different personalities. Some
are quite abrasive, particularly when dealing with people opposed to
God\'s work. Thus, you can make up a local saint with a personality
appropriate to the story you want to tell.

The attitude of saints to the covenant and the magi depends on whether
you decide that magic is inherently sinful. It need not be; magic is
opposed by both Divine and Infernal auras, after all. If magic is
inherently sinful, any saint will want the magi to abandon it. If it is
not, saints will merely urge the magi to use their power in the service
of God. Either way, there are many specific options for using saints.

A saint takes an interest in the covenant, and starts looking after it.
He or she appears in the dreams of covenfolk offering warnings, and
occasionally manifests in the covenant to warn against sin or advise on
God\'s will. On the one hand, this is a very useful ally. On the other,
the magi will want to avoid a Dominion aura springing up within the
covenant.

The covenant comes into conflict, over land or some other resource, with
a monastery that has a particularly protective patron saint. They find
that their magic is opposed by the power of the Divine, forcing them to
find another resolution.

Members of the covenant become particularly devoted to a saint with a
shrine some distance away, and pilgrimages become a feature of normal
life. Even the magi might choose to venerate this saint.

The covenant discovers an important relic in the course of an adventure.
Keeping it at the covenant would guarantee a stream of pilgrims and an
eventual Dominion aura, but giving it away would make a firm ally of the
recipient --- and possibly enemies of the other groups who wanted it.

Structures

The head of the Church on earth is the Pope, the Bishop of Rome, who is
the Vicar of Christ. (A vicar is someone who performs a role on behalf
of someone else.) Over the last century popes have been campaigning to
increase the actual authority of their office, and the campaign is
working. Nevertheless, lower-ranked churchmen have a great deal of
independence. In theory, anyone who disagrees with a lesser bishop\'s
decision can appeal to the pope, but in practice this is so expensive
and difficult that only the most serious problems, involving kings and
major lords, or powerful monasteries, actually make it there.

There are many other bishops across Europe, all based in a city, or at
least somewhere that was as close to a city as the area had when the
bishopric was founded. The church where the bishop has his seat is known
as the cathedral church, from the Latin term for the literal, physical
chair, and the area around is called the diocese. The bishop\'s
responsibilities start with ensuring that the clergy, monks, and nuns
are all doing their jobs and living lives appropriate to their station,
but also extend, in theory, to the spiritual well-being of every human
being in the area. In particular, bishops often find themselves
protecting the Jews of a town from angry, and anti-semitic, mobs.

A bishop carries out his duties primarily by means of visitations. In
these, he visits a priest or monastery, and carries out investigations
to ensure that all is in order. The enthusiasm that bishops bring to
these duties varies widely, but very few will overlook persistent
reports of major abuses.

Within the diocese, Europe is divided up into parishes. Each parish has
a church, the parish church, and a priest, the parish priest, assigned
to look after the spiritual well-being of all those within, a position
called \'having cure of souls\'. Everyone has their own parish, and is
supposed to confess only to their parish priest, although exceptions are
made for travelers and extreme circumstances. In some parishes, the
priest with primary responsibility, called the rector, actually performs
the duties. In others, he pays another priest, called the curate, to do
the actual work for him.

Game Use: Structures

All covenants are in a parish, even if they want nothing to do with the
Church. Thus, the parish priest could come calling at any time, seeking
out the lost sheep of his flock.

A covenant with a cozy relationship with the parish priest hears that
the bishop is coming on a visitation. Precisely how this plays out
depends on the covenant and bishop, but it needs some response.

The covenant wants to get itself recognized as a separate parish, where
the magi can choose the parish priest. This is not unreasonable; most
covenants are large enough and rich enough to justify this. But neither
is it a foregone conclusion, as the characters will have to negotiate a
great deal of Church politics.

Canon Law

The Church has its own law, canon law, which is based on the old Roman
law but covers all aspects of Church life. It also covers a number of
areas that might not seem obviously related to the Church: marriage,
inheritance, and commerce, most notably.

All canon law cases must, in theory, be heard by the bishop of the
appropriate diocese. In 1220, formal structures to delegate this
authority to full-time judges are being established, but the process is
far from complete, and many cases are still judged by the bishop in
person, or by a representative chosen for that particular case.

Heresy is a growing concern of the church courts. Most heretics are
encouraged to accept the teachings of the Church by their parish
priests, and the vast majority, being heretical through ignorance rather
than conviction, do so. The few who reach court generally recant,
returning to the Church, if they are convicted, and this always ends the
case. Those who persist in their heresy may, finally, be handed over to
the secular authorities for execution, but the Church is reluctant to do
this as it all but ensures someone\'s damnation. However, if the
alternative is a serious risk of damnation for more people, misled by
the heretic, they feel they have no choice.

Canon law on commerce makes it illegal to lend money at interest, to buy
things and sell them at a profit unless you have transported them a long
distance, and to buy large stocks of something when it is cheap, to sell
when it is expensive. Canon law only covers Christians, so these
activities are all legal for Jews, which has made a few Jews extremely
wealthy, while inflaming the prejudices of those who owe them money.

Game Use: Canon Law

The magi are accused of heresy, and forced to defend themselves in
court.

The magi use magic to get around some of the canon law rules on
commerce, making a large amount of money, but stirring up opposition
from mundane merchants, who appeal to the bishop.

A friendly bishop is faced with a case of heresy where the heretics
appear to have diabolical powers. Knowing his limits, he appoints one of
the magi as his judge-delegate, sending along a learned clerk to help
out. The magus has strict instructions to save as many heretics as
possible.

Resources

The Church, as an institution, has extensive resources. The most basic
of these is the tithe; the Church is entitled to one tenth of everything
of which God gives the increase; essentially, all agricultural products.
This is a substantial amount, and the Church and its agents are quite
enthusiastic about gathering it. Failing to pay the tithe is a serious
sin, for which heavy penances are routinely assigned.

In addition, the Church owns a good deal of property, from which it
draws income just as any other mundane lord. The result of this is that
many high-ranking clerics are personally very wealthy, a situation that
some people, including some lower-ranking clerics, find incompatible
with the Church\'s mission.

In theory, one third of the tithe is supposed to be used to support the
poor. In practice, much less than this is devoted to charity, but the
Church is still effectively the only source of support for the most
vulnerable members of society.

Game Use: Resources

Magi still have to pay the tithe. God gives the increase on vis sources.
Most priests won\'t care, but what if the local priest does?

A covenant might be located so that the nearest major lord is a bishop
or monastery, rather than a mundane noble. Alternatively, the mundane
noble the covenant had good relations with might die without an heir,
leave his lands to the Church, and give the covenant a new, powerful
neighbor to handle.

Monasteries

Monasteries, and the female equivalent, convents, are a vital part of
the Mythic European landscape. Ranging in size from tiny establishments
with a handful of members to mighty castles with dozens of monks and
influence covering thousands of miles, they shape the Church in many
ways.

The members of monasteries are referred to as \'regular clergy\',
because they are bound by a rule (regulus), as opposed to the \'secular
clergy\', who live in the world (seculum). The details of the monastic
rule vary from one tradition to another, but the basics are the same.

All monks and nuns take vows of poverty, chastity, stability, and
obedience. The vow of poverty means that they have no personal
possessions, that of chastity that they have no sexual relations, that
of stability that they remain at one monastery, and that of obedience
that they do whatever the head of their house commands.

The monastic day is structured around the seven monastic offices, church
services that take place spread throughout the day. In some traditions,
notably the Cluniac, these services have become so elaborate that there
is little time to do anything else other than eat and sleep. In others,
such as the Cistercian, they are still balanced with physical or mental
labor of some sort.

Still, the main service that the monasteries provide is their prayers.
Monks have given up the world to better serve God, and so their prayers
are regarded as particularly effective. Many relics are held at
monasteries, encouraging pilgrimages. As an extension of this, most
monasteries are required to offer hospitality to travelers, at no
charge, although visitors are expected to make a donation in line with
their means.

Giving to monasteries is particularly well-regarded in Europe, and so
many of them have become rich and powerful. Of particular note in this
respect is the abbey of Cluny, in France, which heads the Cluniac Order,
a group of monasteries spread over the whole of Europe. Thus, while the
monks are, technically, poor, many have access to and control of vast
resources.

These resources give the monks time to devote to scholarship and art,
and thus monasteries are often centers of high culture. In recent years
towns and cities have been starting to take over this role, but many
monasteries still have proud traditions of study or craftsmanship.

In the early years of the thirteenth century a new type of regular
clergy makes its appearance. These are the mendicant friars, \'begging
brothers\', who take vows of poverty, chastity, and obedience, and
travel the world preaching and serving God. As yet the two major orders,
Franciscan and Dominican, are still new, but they are growing in
popularity extremely rapidly.

Game Use: Monasteries

While monks make poor player characters, since they are supposed to stay
in their monasteries, friars are an excellent choice. They are supposed
to wander around, and thus have a perfect excuse for ending up at the
covenant.

Monasteries are a good place for traveling magi to stay. Their duty of
hospitality means that they will usually not simply turn away even those
with the Blatant Gift.

Monastic scholars make good correspondents for magi, and good potential
allies.

Miracles

God intervenes in the world, and his interventions take the form of
miracles. Miracles are not common events, but neither are they
incredibly rare. Almost everyone in Mythic Europe knows someone who has
witnessed or benefited from a miracle, and more people have witnessed
miracles than have witnessed Hermetic magic.

By far the most common kind of miracle is a healing miracle, including
the raising of the dead. The dead are normally raised within a week or
so of dying, although God is capable of raising those who have been dead
for longer if he so wishes. Injuries, diseases, and inherited
afflictions are also cleansed by miracles.

The next most common miracle is a punishment miracle, inflicting some
sort of infirmity on a person who has been particularly disrespectful to
God or his agents. These punishments are a call to repentance, and thus
while they are debilitating, they are very rarely fatal.

Finally, there is a vast range of miscellaneous miracles, ranging from
freeing those unjustly imprisoned to saving a talking bird from a hawk,
via sending an angel to fight on a pious knight\'s behalf at a
tournament.

Most healing miracles happen at a shrine holding relics, but it isn\'t a
large majority. The guardians of such shrines, often monks, can expect
to see dozens of miracles in a typical year, and a pilgrim to such a
shrine has a very good chance of witnessing one.

God grants miracles as He wishes, and His purposes are sometimes
inscrutable. However, a miracle is more likely to be granted if it is
sincerely requested by a pious person, if the cause of the affliction
was entirely innocent, and if an appropriate saint adds his prayers to
those of the living Christian (or Jew, or Muslim). Still, God is
perfectly free, and sometimes grants miracles to help people who seem
less than pious.

Game Use: Miracles

Miracles are an excellent way to emphasize the Myth in Mythic Europe,
and storyguides should not be afraid to use them that way. They are
also, however, the ultimate plot device, as they can do anything, no
matter what. Thus, storyguides should use them in moderation, to avoid
leaving the players feeling that they have nothing to do.

Also, setting the frequency of miracles is an important part of deciding
just how Mythic your Mythic Europe is. The frequency described in the
main text is a default level, but you could choose to make miracles very
rare, maybe one per year at major shrines, or very common, so that every
parish sees a handful of miracles within the parish every year.

A grog killed in battle with a dragon is raised from the dead at the
prayers of his wife and five small children. He comes back with a
chilling tale of purgatory, and of having seen a recently-deceased magus
burning in hell. He starts an immediate campaign to bring the covenant
back to righteousness.

A magus confronting some bandits is suddenly deprived of his magical
power. Nevertheless, his grogs easily defeat the attackers, and the
magus is unharmed. His power returns afterwards; what lesson is God
trying to teach him?

A character with a serious problem finds that the magi cannot help, as
it is part of her Essential Nature. Instead, she seeks a miracle.

The Nobility

The Church is a truly European organization, with a common structure and
common beliefs. The nobility are a group of individual lords, with many
common interests and links between them. Although there is a great deal
of shared culture among the nobility, there is less than there is among
the clergy, so this section is even more prone to over-generalization
than the last. More details about the nobility in general can be found
in *Lords of Men,* while the Tribunal books provide information about
the noble culture of particular regions.

Feudalism

Most of Europe is ruled through the feudal system. This system is tied
together by oaths of fealty, in which one person swears to provide a
certain sort of service for another in return for being given control of
an area of land. The sort of service required is overwhelmingly
military; in its simplest form, the person swearing (the vassal)
promises to serve his lord in battle for a certain number of days every
year. If the area of land (called a fief) is large, the vassal may be
required to provide the services of more than one warrior. In that case,
it is very common to grant parts of your fief as fiefs to other
warriors, on condition that they serve you, so that you can meet your
obligations to your lord.

In outline, the system sounds like a simple pyramid, with the king at
the top, and lords of progressively smaller fiefs below. However, things
are far more complex than that. First, lords at most levels have direct
vassals with fiefs of wildly differing sizes. A king might have one
direct vassal who controls an area covering several towns and dozens of
villages, while another controls half of a single village. Further,
vassals can swear fealty to several different lords, as long as they can
meet all the obligations. At the extreme, the king of England is
answerable to no-one for England itself, but has sworn fealty to the
king of France for his possessions in mainland Europe. It is not at all
uncommon for a lord to be a direct vassal of a king for some land, but
to be a vassal of a vassal for others. It is even possible for two
people to be each other\'s vassals, for different fiefs, but that is
rare to the point of being unheard-of.

Within his fief, a lord is responsible for some aspects of law and
order. The extent of his responsibility varies depending on the lord and
the customs of the country, but in general petty crime is under the
jurisdiction of the local lord, and the death penalty can only be
imposed by the king or some other extremely powerful nobles.

All the land in the fief is under the control of the lord. Some of it he
farms himself (the demesne), the rest he rents out to peasants in return
for a share of their crop and some of their labor on his own lands. The
nobility are thus very close to the agricultural cycle, although the
more land a noble has, the more he is insulated by layers of vassals and
staff.

Game Use: Feudalism

Because magi are required by the Code to avoid swearing fealty to any
mundane lord, feudalism is more likely to be a part of the background of
the saga, rather than an immediate source of story seeds. Still, the
complex webs of loyalty it creates are ideal breeding grounds for
stories.

Travel

Medieval nobles travel a lot, for a variety of reasons. First, wars
seldom take place within a noble\'s fief, so in order to fulfill his
obligation to fight, he must travel. Second, lords often summon their
vassals to councils or consultations, so the vassal must travel to
wherever his lord is. Sometimes, the summons comes from the king,
gathering many nobles in one place for a grand council. Third, lords are
Christians like anyone else, and they actually have the resources to go
on pilgrimages. As a result, they often do.

Lords with scattered fiefs normally travel between those fiefs over the
course of the year. This is because it is easier to transport the
noble\'s household between two places than to transport enough food and
drink to satisfy dozens of people for several weeks. As a result, a
powerful noble is rarely in one place for very long, and when he does
arrive it makes an enormous difference to local society.

Lords also visit their vassals. In part this is to reinforce the bonds
of loyalty, and to make sure that the vassal is treating the land well.
It also serves as a way to weaken vassals who are becoming threatening,
because they are required to support their lord and his entourage, an
expensive undertaking.

Finally, nobles simply enjoy visiting one another. Personal visits are
the best way to stay in touch with friends and relatives, and the chance
to visit new people helps to make life more interesting.

Game Use: Travel

Travel, obviously, allows the storyguide to bring nobles into the saga
for a single session, or take them out for a period of time, if so
desired.

The local lord, who is on excellent terms with the covenant, is
expecting a visit from his lord. He asks the covenant for help in
defraying the expenses, and in making sure that the visitor is
impressed.

The local lord is powerful, and only visits that fief every couple of
years. When he does come, however, the magi have to tread very
carefully; he doesn\'t know the truth about the covenant, and they would
prefer to keep it that way.

The local lord, who is somewhat hostile, is called away to a great
council, which drags on. His wife, left behind, struggles with a problem
facing the fief, and calls on the magi for help. If they succeed, she
becomes more friendly, but her husband\'s attitude does not necessarily
change.

Entertainments

The nobility of Mythic Europe have a significant amount of leisure time,
particularly when there isn\'t a war on. As a group of warriors, their
favored pastimes tend to be somewhat warlike. The most extreme example
of this is the tournament. This is basically an organized battle, where
the participants try not to kill each other. The rules do allow the
winners to claim the armor and weapons of the losers, so a skilled
knight can make a good living on the tournament circuit. Many kings are
suspicious of tournaments, and most churchmen believe them to be
inherently sinful.

Tournaments, while popular, are difficult and expensive to organize, and
occasionally banned by Church and lay authorities. Another extremely
popular noble pastime, which does not suffer from these problems, is the
hunt. Almost any animal can be hunted, although the deer is probably the
most popular quarry, and while the standard hunt involved hunters on
horseback, hunting with falcons is also popular, and considered suitable
for women as the human hunters do not have to ride about vigorously.
Some nobles even hunt magical creatures, although that is recognized to
be extremely dangerous.

Large areas of some countries, notably England, are set aside as hunting
ranges for the nobility. No-one else is allowed to hunt the animals
therein, or to cultivate the land. Peasants in the surrounding areas are
generally allowed some activities within these preserves, but they are
very limited, to such things as foraging pigs and gathering acorns.

Nobles also enjoy stories of noble activities, and as more of the
nobility become literate, manuscripts of romances and legends are
increasing in popularity. Even those members of the nobility who cannot
read can have the books read to them. Entertainers, including minstrels,
acrobats, and trained animals, are also popular. Fights between various
animals, such as between two cocks, or between a bear and several dogs,
are also popular.

Game Use: Entertainments

While hunting a magical beast, a noble party is badly injured, and
stumbles into the covenant, seeking shelter and assistance.

A group of nobles target an intelligent magical beast that is allied
with the covenant. The beast asks for help.

A shapeshifter who can turn into a bear is getting into noble households
as a \'trained bear\'. The bear is extremely impressive, but the
shapeshifter has deeper, more devious plans.

Inheritance

Most noble power in Mythic Europe is inherited by the son from the
father. This is, however, far from a universal rule, and squabbles over
the succession are quite common, particularly when a major lordship
(also called an honor) is at stake. In addition, younger sons present a
significant problem. If the honor is split between all the sons, the
family is weakened. On the other hand, giving the younger sons nothing
stores up political trouble, even if the father doesn\'t care at all
about their feelings. Thus, in one sense families would like exactly one
son.

That, however, is very risky, because people die unexpectedly. Thus,
noble families tend to try for a large number of children, in the hope
of getting at least one male heir. Daughters can be married to other
nobles, thus building alliances, but younger sons must be found a place
in the world. The Church is one obvious destination for them, as is
service to a more powerful lord. The most powerful lords, such as kings,
often create honors for their younger sons from holdings that have
reverted to the king after treason, or when a line fails to produce
heirs.

Women only inherit if they have no brothers, and they are expected to
marry someone who can be the \'real\' lord of the area. Almost the only
way for a woman to get real power is for her to be the widow of a lord
who had no heirs, as in that case the lands normally stay with her until
her death, before reverting to the overlord.

Game Use: Inheritance

A magus was the fifth son of a powerful noble. Now his four older
brothers have died, and he is expected to become the new lord. The Order
forbids it, but if he doesn\'t take the role, war threatens.

A lord with no heirs comes to the magi for help in siring a son. This
isn\'t very difficult for magi with the appropriate Arts, but the
consequences may be profound.

A lord with no male heirs raised his youngest daughter as a boy, to
provide an heir within his family. He died when she was very young, but
the family servants kept up the pretense, so that the girl is now the
lord of the honor. She is, however, expected to marry a woman. She seeks
help from the magi.

Mythic Options

This section covers options for increasing the amount of magic in the
nobility. If you want to keep medieval society fairly mundane, you
shouldn\'t use any of them. If, on the other hand, you want magic to be
everywhere, you might use all of them.

Medieval legends often tell of faerie nobles, living in a very similar
manner to human nobles but with strange features, such as being dressed
entirely in green and surviving having their head cut off. In Mythic
Europe, such nobles might swear fealty to the king and be part of the
normal feudal structure.

While Hermetic magi are prohibited from serving mundane nobles, lesser
magicians are not. A noble line where a useful supernatural ability is
passed from generation to generation might hold land on condition that
they serve the king with that ability, and if the person who inherits
the ability is female, she inherits in her own right.

A line of intelligent, magical horses might be the real rulers of a
fief. While there is a nominal human lord, who rides the current true
ruler, the horses are the power behind the throne. (This could also
apply to magical hunting dogs, or magical hawks. Magical pigs should
only run a fief if you want a slightly silly location.)

A powerful faerie or magical creature might accept the fealty of human
lords, and refuse to swear fealty to any mere human being. This option
effectively creates a new kingdom in Europe, and a kingdom where the
provisions of the Code are less than perfectly clear. If an area is
ruled by a dragon, is it mundane?

A line of wise and successful lords might owe their success to an
enchanted item of some sort. The item might be able to support complete
incompetents or, more likely, give a competent lord a significant edge
in war and politics, so that even a less talented heir can get by. The
importance of the item may or may not be public knowledge. The item
might be Hermetic, from another magical source, or faerie in origin.
Relics and infernal artifacts can play much the same role, but they have
slightly different implications.

An evil lord might really have sold his soul to the devil, and thus have
lots of infernal powers to help him oppress the peasants.

Towns and Trade

If the generalizations about the nobility had exceptions,
generalizations about towns are almost nothing but exceptions. A town is
a settlement where a significant proportion of the population (a third
and up, say) does not make its living directly from agriculture. On this
definition, towns range from villages with a few hundred inhabitants to
the great metropolis of Constantinople, with tens of thousands at the
very least (well, before it was sacked, at least). Obviously, a town of
a few hundred people in Ireland bears little resemblance to
Constantinople. More detail about towns and trade is provided in *City &
Guild.*

Nevertheless, these points can be used to create towns that feel
medieval, even if they don\'t fit exactly into any actual part of
medieval Europe.

Markets and Fairs

Markets are the stage before a town, and often the nucleus around which
new towns grow. A market is a formally established place and time for
trading locally produced goods. Most gather once per week, although
there are exceptions, and draw people from an area about twelve miles
across. This allows people to walk to market, do their business, and
walk home, all in a single day.

There may be rules about who is allowed to buy and sell what at the
market. For example, peasants may be required to sell their grain to
merchants resident in the town, and only those merchants are allowed to
sell grain to anyone else. There are often fees for setting up stalls at
the market, and the lord controlling the market can collect fines at a
market court.

The bulk of trade at all markets is agricultural produce, but other
goods, including those brought some distance, are also available. Truly
exotic goods, however, cannot be found here; the selection is limited to
simple tools, clothes, home utensils, and the like. The main customers
are peasants, so the offerings are tailored to them.

Because large numbers of people gather at them, markets are also centers
for news, entertainment, and people seeking employment, or just wanting
to meet new people. Most peasants travel to market many times per year,
so they are not as cut off from news of the wider world as modern
players might think. It takes time for news to travel, but if it is
interesting, travel it does.

Fairs are, essentially, temporary towns. They normally happen once per
year, and last for several days. The smallest draw from a large region
(that\'s what makes them more than markets), and the largest, in the
Champagne region of France, draw from the whole of Europe. In most ways,
a fair is a really big market, but almost anything can be bought there.
The customers include the nobility and high churchmen, so luxury goods
are sold.

By the early thirteenth century the greatest days of the fairs are over,
as towns begin to take over their role, but they still have a great deal
of life left in them.

Game Usage: Markets and Fairs

Sending the grogs to market makes an excellent story that need not
involve any magi.

Markets can provide substantial income, so a covenant might want to
establish one under its control. A market controlled by the magi is also
a good way to slowly put magically created goods into circulation,
without raising too many suspicions. However, markets bring visitors,
who might be over curious, and attract hostility from other local
markets, that don\'t like the competition.

An ambitious covenant might even try to sponsor a fair, but that just
makes the potential problems even larger.

Magi needing exotic pieces of laboratory equipment, or materials from
distant lands, travel to a fair to find them.

Towns

Most medieval towns cover a fairly small area of land, and many are
walled. Within the walls buildings can have as many as four stories, and
streets are very narrow. Rubbish is thrown into the streets, including
the rubbish from slaughterhouses, and feral animals feed off it. Sewage
may also be thrown into the streets, or into the river.

As a result the air in towns is very bad, and often unbalances the
humors of those living there. People die significantly younger in towns
than they do in the countryside, and most towns only maintain their
population through immigration from the land around.

Despite the dangers and unpleasantness of living in a town, people
immigrate because there are jobs there. If a peasant family grows too
large for its land to support, daughters are often sent to work as
domestic servants. Similarly, peasants with no land might head to the
towns to work as laborers, or even find a trade.

People visit the town even more often, because the larger towns are
becoming, in effect, permanent fairs where the wealthy can buy almost
anything they want. In most areas of Mythic Europe there are few adult
peasants who haven\'t visited a town at least once.

In most areas, towns stand a little outside the feudal system. They are
often run by councils of the leading merchants, or other wealthy
citizens, rather than by a warrior noble, and sometimes they may be
entirely independent, and lords of a significant area of the
countryside. In these cases, people may flee to the town to escape harsh
lords, or to flee justice. Towns are the only places with a crowd large
enough to lose yourself in.

Game Use: Towns

Clever use of magic can offset the penalties of the bad air of towns,
and small magical auras, or even regiones, might persist, allowing a
covenant to be sited there.

Most of the story ideas for markets and fairs also apply to towns.

In some countries, towns have a great deal of discretion to run their
own affairs, as long as they pay a certain amount of tax. Thus, a
covenant might try to be legally recognized as a town. Many covenants
are certainly large enough.

Mythic Options

A faerie town is just as possible as a faerie lord, and would probably
be a very popular place for magi to go shopping. It might also be fully
integrated into the local economy, and even have some human immigrants.

People with supernatural abilities could set up as traders in a town, as
well as in service to a lord. This option needs handling with
considerable care, however, as towns with Magic Shops feel very much
like generic fantasy.

A town might be alive as a whole, and aligned to any realm. People
living there might be real, or merely part of the town. Such a town
might even be able to move.

Peasants

Peasants make up 90% of medieval society. While they don\'t really eat
mud, they don\'t, for the most part, eat very well, and famine is a
recurrent feature of society.

Peasants make their living from the land or the sea, whether from arable
crops, livestock, or fishing. Their legal rights vary a great deal from
region to region, from theoretically the same as a nobleman, to almost
no rights at all. In all areas, they are almost powerless, and thus
often cannot claim those rights they have.

Most peasant families are very nearly self-sufficient, growing their own
food, maintaining their own homes, and mending their own clothes and
furniture. However, they are as prone to curiosity as any other human
being, and all have been to market, the overwhelming majority to town,
and most on a pilgrimage to a local shrine at least. While they are all
illiterate and without formal education, they are neither stupid nor
completely uninformed, on the whole.

In Mythic Europe, the supernatural is a part of the lives of most
peasants. Minor magical creatures and faeries visit villages, or live in
the crop fields, or watch over the pigs foraging in the local woods. A
magical pool might make a virgin beautiful and irresistible if he or she
bathes in it (local stories say it might work twice, but no-one has even
been able to try), a tree might grow enchanted apples that taste, and
intoxicate, like the finest cider, or the leader of the local wolves
might negotiate an agreement with the villagers every year, specifying
how many sheep the pack will take. Very few villages are without any
touch of the supernatural in the surrounding area, but most such touches
have little effect on daily life.

Public Power for Women

Relatively few women hold public power in Mythic Europe. The elaboration
of their roles below should not discourage players from selecting
exceptional women as their characters. The constraints, and ways to
avoid them, listed here are suggested as material for storytelling, not
as proscriptions. Troupes should consider carefully how the fun of a
historically accurate setting intersects with the fun of playing a
character who uses her wits to challenge social conventions. The Paid
Rights Virtue (page @@) is a game-mechanical way to acknowledge that an
exceptional woman is just that: exceptional.

Players, who are likely most familiar with the English system, should be
aware that women have fewer rights in England than in most other parts
of Mythic Europe. This is, in part, an effect of the Conquest. The
military character of the Norman nobility has not entirely given way to
hereditary aristocracy. In areas where landholding is seen as a method
of supporting warriors, women have fewer rights, while in those areas
where landholding is seen as method of generating money to sustain an
army, women have greater rights.

Dressing As A Man

This is the simplest way to ignore social conventions concerning women.
There are many folkloric examples of women dressing as men and doing
almost anything men do. War or pilgrimage, for example, are easier when
pretending to be male. This may become a Dark Secret (page @@), and may
also qualify the character for Gender Non-conforming (page @@).

Dressing as a man is not usually a successful strategy for the extended
term: marriage and fathering children are difficult, if surmountable,
obstacles. A woman who dresses as a man and engages in warfare is,
however, likely to die young, as most men do, so this may not be a
concern.

Holding Land

Women can gain control of land in six ways: during absence, through
inheritance, via political success, through conquest, in a widow\'s
portion, or as a steward.

Absence

Landholding is intimately tied, in most of Mythic Europe, to providing
military service. The male head of most families must be available to
fight in campaigns, some of which last for months, or in civil wars,
which can sputter along for years. Many nobles leave their wives as
their deputies. The value of an educated wife to the military
preparedness of her husband has overcome many of the objections
concerning the education of women.

Women raised for this task always have Leadership and Profession:
Steward scores. They also rapidly develop Ability scores that their
husbands have due to the peculiarities of their holdings, allowing them
to oversee work, or at least select competent overseers. In this role of
deputy the woman has the right to spend the income of the husband\'s
territory, and may command his vassals in many matters, including war.

The role that women play in the command of troops varies between the
societies of Europe. It is further influenced by the personalities,
Reputations and resources of the lady and her vassals. Women rarely lead
troops into battle, but there are many references to noble women holding
castles against sieges. During a siege the lady may command troops
directly, or may direct their command through a skilled lieutenant.

Many noblewomen maintain networks of agents completely separate from the
households of their husbands. A wife may take over her husband\'s
network if he dies or is on campaign. This role, as correspondent and
diplomat, is expected of the wives of nobility. A woman who does not
socialize is considered a poor supporter of her husband\'s efforts.

Inheritance

Lands inherited by women are a recognized feature of feudal life in most
kingdoms. In most areas land goes to sons before daughters, but
daughters are given preference over more distant male relations, like
uncles and cousins. Some areas grant all of the land to the eldest son,
and the daughter receives it intact if there are no sons. In others,
when a paternal line extinguishes in this way, the land is divided
between all of the remaining sisters, or their husbands. In a few areas,
women are permitted to inherit directly, either because the land of a
family is divided between all of the siblings not already members of the
church, or because the lord is permitted to nominate his heirs and so
may choose his daughters.

A woman who rules a fief by inheritance usually retains legal authority
in it during her marriage. With the exception of England, where the
wife\'s rights become the husband\'s, there are many examples of women
who married another noble, yet continued to hold court, issue charters,
and command vassals. In Castile there is at least one example of an odd
midpoint, where the bride continued to rule in her own land, with the
exception of her dowry, which was transferred to her husband. At the
death of the heiress, her lands may be kept by her eldest son, if the
area practices primogeniture. In areas where the lands of the parents
are divided, the separate character of the wife\'s lands make them an
obvious domain for one of her sons.

Land that a father has added to his ancestral territories may be made
available as dowry. Dowries are used, in much of Europe, as a sort of
inheritance before the death of the father.

Political Success

It is rare for anyone, male or female, to be granted land for purely
political favors, but it occasionally occurs as a result of stories. A
common way for a woman to be granted land is to become the mistress of a
powerful nobleman and bear his child. If the woman has suitable
abilities, she may be made the child\'s guardian until he is of age to
join his father\'s household.

Conquest

Some women claim land through invasion, allowing their retinue of
knights to settle conquered areas as vassals. This requires loyal
retainers and either a friendly monarch or a formidable reputation, as a
mercenary captain or disloyal male vassal might try to swear fealty for
the land himself. Such women rarely enter combat themselves, but since
they are the leaders of their armies, it would be insubordinate to
gainsay them if they wished it.

Widow\'s Portion and Stewardship

In most areas a widow is permitted to retain the use of a portion of her
husband\'s lands for her own use after his death. As a rule of thumb,
assume a widow can keep the profit, not income, of a third of her
husband\'s land until she remarries. If the woman was already landed at
marriage, and has no adult sons, then she is likely to have complete
ownership of her lands returned to her. Widows are extremely common in
Mythic Europe.

In some areas, like France, Castile and parts of the Holy Roman Empire,
a widow may act as her son\'s guardian. This allows her to administer
land on his behalf until he is an adult. Stewardship of lands may need
to be purchased from the dead husband\'s overlord. In many areas the
lord has the right to select the stewards for the heirs of vassals, and
he may even arrange the marriage of the widow. By convention, no woman
may be given by her lord in marriage a third time.

Nuns

A third avenue for power, and one much enjoyed by the younger daughters
of some lords, is the church. The role of nunneries is discussed in
greater detail in the supplements *Realms of Power: The Divine* and *The
Church.* Nuns are considered wards of the bishop, and brides of Christ.
They cannot usually be forced to marry and are not answerable to their
fathers or other local lords. Nuns hold a great deal of land in Mythic
Europe, and their estates are not divided by inheritance.

Young women may take temporary vows which allow them to retreat into the
life of a nun while events unfold in the secular world. It is possible
for a sufficiently influential nobleman to force a woman to leave the
nunnery and marry, but this is rare. It is common for the female
relatives of a man who has lost a war to retreat into the nunneries, so
that they are not at the mercy of the victors.

Women As Warriors

In most areas there are folktales about particular women who, at some
past time, acted in the role of knight. How characters react to
contemporary women who attempt the same course varies by culture and by
the status of the particular woman. In the Order of Hermes, the
philosophy of Plato, coupled with the scarcity of The Gift, has led to a
position of equity. Plato advocated the training of women for all the
duties of the state including administration and warfare. Very few women
seek military success, but sufficient do for the role to be accepted, to
some degree, in most areas. The following examples may guide the
generation of background for female nobles who seek military roles.

Dressing As A Man: Margaret of Beverley

Margaret of Beverly was born in the Holy Land: her parents were English
pilgrims who commenced their journey while her mother was pregnant.
After reaching adulthood and seeing to the education of her younger
brother, Margaret decided to revisit Jerusalem. Through terrible luck,
she was present when Jerusalem fell to Saladin in 1187.

She pretended to be a man, and took part in the defense of the wall,
wearing improvised armor. Margaret was struck by a fragment thrown up by
a stone fired from a siege engine, and carried scars for the rest of her
life. She was captured, ransomed, and then after a difficult period
involving slavery, theft, and rescue by the grace of the Virgin she was
able to arrive in Antioch, in time to participate in the siege there.

After peace was concluded she sailed for England with the English army,
departing from Acre. Her other travels, to Rome and Santiago, were
almost as adventurous as this first trip. Historically, after her
journeys she sought out her younger brother, who had become a monk, and
he led her to the contemplative life. She joined a nunnery at Laon, in
France, and may live there still in 1220.

Eleanor of Aquitaine: Inheritance

Eleanor attended the Second Crusade with her husband, and was attended
by a guard of female knights dressed as Amazons and mounted on white
horses. Eleanor\'s right to lead her troops, as overlord of Aquitaine,
was incontestable. The queens of several of the other leaders followed
her example. Her behavior was considered scandalous, and led to a Papal
Bull forbidding women from taking the cross in the Third Crusade.

Sikelgaita of Sicily: Conquest

A princess of the Lombards, then the wife of the Duke of Apulia and
Sicily, Sikelgaita is recorded as having participated in her husband\'s
battles, dressed as a knight, and as charging enemies with a spear. In
her husband\'s wars against the Byzantine Empire, she is recorded as
rallying some troops that had fled a battle, sending them back into the
fray at the Battle of Dyrrachium. The Norman conquests in Byzantium were
lost after the war turned against her family.

Petronilla of Leicester: Absence

Petronilla is recorded as having armed herself as a knight and fought in
battles during the reign of Henry II, perhaps due to the absence of her
husband. A namesake was active during the wars of John against his
barons, and purchased the right to select her own husband. This
Petronilla used John\'s desperation for money to haggle the relatively
good price of 4000 marks. The latter Petronilla has only been dead eight
years.

Matilda of Tuscany: Political Success

Matilda\'s parents were allies of the Pope, and open rebels against his
rival the Emperor. Matilda was trained in warfare from an early age. Her
tutor was later the commander of her forces and stated he had trained
her in lance, pike, axe and sword. Matilda is widely believed to have
ridden into battle from her teenage years.

She was the primary proponent of the Pope\'s cause during the
Investiture Controversy, and through a series of marriages, alliances
and wars, she all but destroyed Imperial authority in Northern Italy.
Matilda led her armies through a series of wars, crushing Imperial
forces so that only a few cities remained under the Emperor\'s banner.
She spent her old age dispatching armies to besiege and capture many of
these.

Errors and Anachronisms

Historical errors are inevitable in any historical game. After all, even
professional historians make historical errors in their books, which
other professional historians then correct. In the game, an anachronism
is only a problem if it spoils the illusion that the game takes place in
a particular historical period. Thus, introducing guns and wristwatches
is bound to be a problem, while getting the cut of men\'s tunics wrong
is only a problem if one of your players is a specialist in medieval
costume.

If some of your players do know a lot more about particular aspects of
the medieval period than you, you can use them as a resource. Have them
explain the details of costume, scholarship, or food, as it becomes
relevant to the game. A player who uses his knowledge to break the mood
for everyone else is a problem, and you should talk to him about it. If
you know more than your players, then they are not likely to be bothered
by anything that doesn\'t bother you.

As you play the game, you might well want to read more about medieval
history. This is good, but it can mean that you discover that some
aspect of your saga contradicts historical fact. What do you do then? If
it isn\'t a problem for you or your players, you can leave it the way it
is. If, on the other hand, the discrepancy does bother you, there are
two options. Minor details can simply be changed to be historically
accurate. If the King of France has always been Louis in your saga, but
you discover that the historical king was Philip, you can simply
announce that the king of France is actually called Philip, and always
has been.

For things which have played an important role in the saga, that is
unlikely to be an option. If the magi have been interacting extensively
with the Parliament of England, you can\'t make it go away when you
discover that, historically, it was first called ten years into your
saga\'s future. The best option here, if something bothers you and is
too important to change, is to explicitly move your saga to an alternate
history. Work out some story as to why Parliament started thirty years
earlier, or whatever. Since the player characters have been interacting
with the feature extensively it is extremely unlikely that its current
state would be historical anyway. It is worth remembering that,
historically, there were no magi and no Order of Hermes, so the game is
set in an alternate history in the first place.
