Stories

General Considerations

There are a number of general points that you should bear in mind when
writing stories or adventures for any roleplaying game, including Ars
Magica. Other considerations in this chapter are more specific to Ars
Magica, but they may still have wider applicability.

Each of these guidelines can be violated in an occasional adventure
without spoiling the players\' enjoyment. However, it is better if most
stories follow them.

Player Character Centrality

Remember that the player characters are the central characters in the
story. They may not be the most powerful characters, but they are
central to the action. For example, in a horror story the characters
must be weaker than the threat, because otherwise it will not inspire
horror. However, the story is still about the way the characters deal
with the threat, not about the activities of the monster.

You should always plan for the conflicts in the story to be resolved by
the player characters, and for the outcome to be determined by their
actions. In a horror story, the survival of the player characters should
depend on what they do, not on the actions of NPCs. In a political
story, the decisions of the player characters should make a definite
difference to the outcome. As noted on page @@, troupe style play can
help here, because even if player characters need rescuing, other player
characters can often perform the rescue.

Plots

Roleplaying game stories should not have a plot in advance. A plot is a
sequence of events, with the causal relationships between them drawn
out, and if you have that in advance there is only one thing for the
player characters to do. This is a remarkably hard lesson to learn,
because all the relevant forms of literature with which we are familiar
do have plots, as do a lot of published adventures.

Instead, a story needs a set of situations, decisions on what will
happen if the player characters do nothing, and decisions on what will
happen in response to some of the more obvious possible player actions.
Even then, you need to be ready for the player characters to do
something unexpected. The better you know the situation, the easier this
will be, although some storyguides are naturally very good at winging
it.

If possible, you should set up several ways for the player characters to
succeed in the adventure, so that the players do have real choices,
which don\'t come down to \'do it the right way or die\'. This is
related to the next point, the importance of variable outcomes.

Variable Outcomes

You should have at least three possible outcomes for any story: one
corresponding to success, another to a neutral performance, and one to
failure. Ideally, there should be several degrees of success and
failure. This allows you to set up one path as the route to the best
success, without dooming the characters if they try something different.

In general, you should also avoid disastrous results for failures, at
least unless the players are really, really stupid. If a failure would
seriously damage the saga, you should make sure that it is very easy to
avoid failing completely. Similar considerations may apply to the
survival of magi and companions, although that depends on the attitude
that your players have to their characters. (Grogs, on the other hand,
are pretty much expected to die.) A disastrous outcome should be
foreshadowed with increasing clarity as it gets closer, and ways to
mitigate it should become ever more obvious. It is, of course, perfectly
acceptable to make a positive outcome impossible if the characters
follow a certain route, but disaster should be easy to avoid.

This means thinking of bad results that do not involve the death of
beloved characters or the destruction of the covenant. Good options are
to take possessions away from the characters, or to injure them so that
they lose a lot of study time. You can also inflict longer-term
penalties, but such penalties can spoil a player\'s enjoyment of a
character, so they should be used with caution; the point of a game is
to have fun, not to undergo some sort of moral discipline.

Hooks

Possibly the hardest part of an adventure is the beginning. It can be
extremely hard for the players to see what they are supposed to do. This
means that you need to have at least two possible courses of action in
mind when you set up a story. It is a good idea to also think of ways in
which you can supply hints if the players are completely floundering. If
you have variable degrees of success available, you can give hints to a
lesser degree of success, so that the players do benefit from working
things out for themselves.

If possible, parts of the adventure should naturally flow into one
another. The characters should not simply work out that they need to go
to some place; they should work out that they need to go to that place
and do something, and then when they do something it becomes clear what
their following options are. If you don\'t do that, the adventure
effectively begins again every time the characters complete the actions
that have been made clear so far, and stand around wondering what to do
next.

A related consideration concerns clues and information. If some
information is important to the story, you should have one specific way
that the characters can learn it in mind when writing the story. They
may learn it another way, but if there is one way that you know will
work, then the characters have a reasonable chance of learning the
information. In addition, this method should be something that makes
sense in the context of the story and saga. Asking the inhabitants of a
village about a monster makes sense; going and looking behind the altar
in the church does not, unless the monster has been seen coming from
there.

It is surprisingly difficult to judge this, as the elements of stories
always look obvious to the storyguide. One rule of thumb is that things
need to be more obvious than you think. Beyond that, you can learn from
experience what sorts of things occur to your players, and what
situations leave them stymied.

Climaxes

It is good for a story to reach a climax and finish there, rather than
petering out. This is, however, very difficult to reconcile with the
importance of not having a plot. The best way round it is to work out
two or three possible ways to resolve the situation set up in the story,
and to make sure that each is a climactic event in which the player
characters play a central role.

Sometimes this is simply impossible, as only one climax can resolve
everything, and most alternatives leave some tidying up. In such a case,
the tidying up should be made as trivial as possible, so that it
doesn\'t need to be played out in detail. For example, if a diabolist
has kidnapped the daughter of a local lord, a true climax would be
defeating the diabolist in his lair and freeing the girl. If the girl is
freed first, then the diabolist should come after the characters, so
that the adventure doesn\'t end with them simply sneaking out of the
lair and making their way home. On the other hand, if the diabolist is
killed first, you should make it easy to get into the lair and rescue
the girl, so that it can be glossed over in a few sentences.

This is probably the most flexible rule. If the players want to play
through the aftermath in detail, because they enjoy that sort of
roleplaying, you should certainly allow them to do so.

Story Types

The power level of a saga makes a large difference to the sorts of
stories you can easily run. Hermetic magi are extremely flexible,
especially once they have a bit of experience. In most cases (see Saga
Speed, on page @@) the power level of a saga will increase over time,
and it is best if the style of play changes with it.

For simplicity, this discussion divides stories into three types:
reactive, where something happens and the player characters respond;
proactive, where the player characters want to do something and go out
to make it happen; and soap opera, where the stories arise naturally
from the continuing lives of the characters. Obviously, most stories
will have elements of all of these types, but the basic distinction is
helpful.

Reactive Stories

Reactive stories are a good way to start a saga, because it gives the
players something immediate to do. They also serve to remind the players
that their characters are not aware of everything going on in the world
before it happens. They work well with young magi, but become harder to
create as the magi get older.

This is because, with a reactive story, the magi are only interested in
resolving the problem, and thus will use the most efficient means
available. In general, they do not care *how* the problem gets resolved.
Thus, elder magi might solve a political campaign against the covenant
through the liberal use of Mentem spells. This is unlikely to provide
the hours of entertaining political play that the storyguide was after.
Investigative stories are quickly short-circuited by Intellego magic,
and enemies that a powerful magus cannot simply dispatch are too
powerful to be common.

Once the magi are very powerful, it is possible to run reactive stories
for just the companions and grogs. Give them a reason not to disturb the
magi, and then let them sort the problem out by themselves. It is
possible to make the stories very challenging for the mundane
characters, because if everything goes horribly wrong the players\'
other characters can charge in to save the day, which is much more
satisfying for the players than having non-player characters do it.

There are several books full of reactive stories in the Ars Magica line.
*Tales of Mythic Europe* contains stories suitable for relatively young
magi, while *Tales of Power* contains stories for older characters.
*Hooks* contains a number of short stories designed to introduce new
elements, such as noble politics or ancient magic, to the saga, and
prime the characters to start on proactive stories. *Thrice-Told Tales*
contains stories designed in three parts, which happen several years
apart as part of the saga. Finally, *Dies Irae* contains several stories
concerning ways in which the world might end, if the characters cannot
prevent it.

Proactive Stories

Proactive stories are good at any power level. For one thing, you know
that at least one player is interested in pursuing the story. For
another, if the player wants stories to resolve something, that means
that his character cannot trivially achieve it. As a magus increases in
power, the character\'s ideas get steadily more grandiose, but always
remain challenging. These challenges might arise because the character
does not want to resolve the story in the easiest way possible.

As an example, a powerful maga might want to win the friendship of a
local monastery, and have it be genuine friendship rather than magically
enforced. All at once, the maga\'s magical power becomes much less
important. She can use it to perform spectacularly helpful acts, but she
cannot simply use Creo Mentem to make all the monks love her.
Alternatively, a magus might want to make the covenant\'s magical aura
into a mobile regio, so that they can travel secretly around Europe.
Hermetic magic cannot just do this, no matter how high the magus\'s Arts
are, so he must spend time looking for hidden mysteries and unearthing
forgotten secrets. Things that go wrong in his experiments might well
require a great deal of power to put right.

In one sense, hooking into these stories is very easy; the players want
to do it. In another, it\'s very difficult, as getting suggestions out
of your players can be like getting blood out of a stone. The best thing
to do is just keep asking what the players want their characters to do,
until they provide answers on which you can hang a story.

Several supplements for Ars Magica provide ideas for proactive stories.
*Ancient Magic*, *Legends of Hermes*, and *Mythic Locations* describe
things that characters might search for, while *Hermetic Projects* and
*Transforming Mythic Europe* describe things that the characters might
try to create.

Soap Opera

Almost any long-running saga develops elements of soap opera, as the
characters develop histories with each other. These sorts of story work
well at all levels of power, because powerful magi have good reasons not
to intervene with brute power when their friends are involved, and even
if they do, then the consequences of their actions simply give rise to
more soap operatic complications.

\'Soap opera\' does not mean that the stories are all about the
adulteries of covenfolk, although some may be. It can include the
ongoing relationship with a whimsical faerie queen, delicate
negotiations with a dragon, and repeated battles with a demon who has
injured the covenant in the past. Essentially, a soap opera story is one
where the characters are constrained by the results of the past and
their plans for the future.

*Antagonists* details a number of characters who would have ambiguous
and difficult relations with player characters, and who could play an
important part in soap-opera stories.

Story Ideas

The first question faced by a new Ars Magica storyguide is \'What do
magi do?\'. What sort of adventures can you send them on? On the whole,
they do not go into cave complexes full of monsters, kill lots of them,
and then carry away piles of treasure. On the other hand, they might do
that occasionally. This section provides some guidance on stories.

Exploration

The characters go somewhere they haven\'t been before, and find out
about it. This covers going into caves, killing monsters, and taking
their stuff, but it is much broader. It also includes traveling to the
local abbey and trying to set up good relations with the abbot, finding
a faerie forest and learning how to collect raw vis there, and even
visiting other covenants of the Order for the first time.

Exploration stories are a very good way to start a saga, as the
characters and players will both want to know more about the area around
their covenant. In addition, once they have been introduced to an area
you can use that place to generate more stories.

*Mythic Locations* is a whole book full of places for characters to
explore.

Places to Explore

The Covenant. If the covenant was there before the player characters
joined, they may not know everything about it.

Mundane Villages. The villages nearest the covenant will become aware of
its existence, so it is a good idea if the magi know a bit about them.
Friendly relations would be ideal, of course.

Mundane Towns. The magi are likely to need supplies which have to be
bought in a town, so they should explore the local towns. This might be
best done by sending the grogs, with maybe a companion.

Other Covenants. Magi are expected to give hospitality to visiting magi,
even if they turn up uninvited. Getting to know your neighbors is a good
idea, provided you can avoid upsetting them.

A faerie forest where the intelligent creatures have the shape of
animals, and the dumb brutes have the shape of humans.

A faerie palace where a shining queen grants rewards to those who bring
the most beautiful stories. The stories become jewels or fine tapestries
when told, and it is possible to learn much from the queen\'s stored
treasures.

A faerie village which looks a lot like a mundane village, except that
the wheat is literally golden and the fruit trees bear gems. Attempting
to eat the food is not recommended.

A set of ancient standing stones which form a magical regio. In higher
levels the stones are aware and intelligent, being the forms of ancient
elementals.

An abandoned village, depopulated by an infernal plague and now the home
of demons and undead.

A lake which covers both a magical regio and a faerie regio. If
characters enter the magical regio, they find many talking fish, which
live in an elaborate society. In the faerie regio they find beautiful
people living underwater, in a castle built of shells.

A covenant that fell under mysterious circumstances, and lain
undisturbed since. (See *Calebais: The Broken Covenant.*)

Treasure Hunting

Magi are not immune to the lure of treasure hunting, particularly the
lure of raw vis. For a covenant, the greatest treasure is a vis source,
which reliably provides a certain number of pawns of vis every year.
Mundane treasure also has some appeal, but most covenants are rich
anyway, and magi with vis can make mundane riches fairly easily. Books
are an exception, as useful ones cannot be magically created. Enchanted
devices tempt magi almost as much as vis, and in some cases the search
for an Arcane Connection to a powerful enemy can motivate an adventure.

You should be careful about handing out vis sources in the early
sessions of the saga, as a generous supply of vis can lead to fast
advancement on the part of the magi. If an isolated vis treasure is too
large, you can just refrain from giving any more for a while, but taking
a vis source away is more likely to annoy the players.

*Ancient Magic* is, in an important way, a whole book of treasures for
characters to hunt, although the reward is more likely to be knowledge
than a physical item. *Legends of Hermes* describes important magi from
the history of the Order, but involves the player characters by having
them hunt the treasures that those magi left behind them.

Treasures to Hunt

The raw vis found in the body of the magical wolf that hunts in the
hills north of the covenant.

The raw vis found in the tears of happiness cried by a particular faerie
prince.

A shield created by the wizard who trained the wizard who trained
Bonisagus. The shield is said to defend its wielder from all magic, no
matter how powerful, but it also has great historical interest.

The cauldron owned by a powerful faerie, which is said to have the power
to raise the dead.

A staff created by a powerful Flambeau magus, said to have the power to
create a fire large and hot enough to reduce a city to fine ash.

A flying castle, crafted by a follower of Tytalus decades ago, that
simply vanished from Hermetic knowledge. (See *Legends of Hermes,* The
Flying Castle of Thomae)

The library of a hermit magus who used to live somewhere near the
covenant.

A fallen temple of Mercury, still containing details of some of the
powerful rituals of the Cult of Mercury. (See *Mythic Locations,* The
Fallen Temple of Mercury)

An Arcane Connection to the dragon that lives in the mountains, so that
the magi can use sympathetic magic to overcome its Magic Resistance.

Requests for Assistance

In many fantasy stories and legends, heroes or oppressed villagers
travel to the wizard\'s tower, looking for assistance. In Ars Magica,
the player characters are the ones who get asked for help. You could run
an interesting story in which the players take the roles of people
seeking help from the covenant, and those characters could join the
covenant as grogs after their success, but more normally these stories
would involve the magi responding to requests.

One problem with this sort of story is that the magi might not want to
help, so it is generally better if the saga creates some reason for them
to listen to the request. For example, most magi will listen to a
request for help from a noble whom they have been desperately trying to
turn into an ally, but are likely to ignore a request from a bunch of
smelly peasants they\'ve never heard of. On the other hand, the story
might be more concerned with how the covenant responds to the request,
rather than with what happens when they have made their decision.

Things to be Asked

A village is being stalked by a monster which carries off and eats
virgins.

The same village, nine months later, has a lot of strange babies who
don\'t appear entirely human.

A village is threatened by famine after the river dried up.

The relics have been stolen from an abbey, and the monks fear that magic
or devil-worshippers were involved.

Magi at the covenant made a bargain, almost a century ago, with a
powerful monster, so that it would not destroy a city. The period of the
bargain is almost up, and the city elders want the current magi to
extend it. They have no idea what the details were.

A nobleman is involved in a dispute with his neighbor, which is heading
towards war. He portrays himself as the innocent victim of an
unscrupulous robber, and begs the assistance of the magi.

The other nobleman turns up a week later with a similar story of wronged
innocence.

Crises at Home

Some emergency faces the covenant. The advantage of this sort of story
is that the characters will try to solve it. The problem is that the
consequences of failure can be serious, so you have to give some thought
to what will happen if the characters *don\'t* succeed.

In general, the reward for success in such adventures is simply that
things do not get any worse. Thus, you should avoid relying on them too
heavily; give the players a chance to get positive rewards for their
heroism.

Potential Crises

A monster attacks the covenant.

A magus from another covenant starts a campaign of harassment against
the covenant, being careful to avoid blatantly violating the Code. He
might attack grogs, or blight crops, but he will not scry on the
covenant, nor attack a magus without declaring Wizard\'s War.

A bishop hears that the covenant is full of heretics, and sets out, with
a small army, to investigate.

A local lord demands that the covenant swear fealty to him, or face the
consequences. Swearing is against the Code, but so is getting into a war
with the nobility.

A powerful faerie decides to use the covenant as part of his latest
game.

The covenant\'s Magical aura starts to fade.

The covenant\'s Magical aura suddenly strengthens, and the magi find
themselves sharing space with a group of annoyed, arrogant, and powerful
spirits.

The covenant disappears into a regio, and the magi cannot immediately
find the way out. (Or in, for those who were away at the time.)

The grogs rebel against the tyrannical rule of the magi. The players are
likely to be playing both sides of this dispute, which could be tricky,
but very effective for experienced players.

Politics

The Order of Hermes has extensive politics, and the mundane elites of
particular areas also have political concerns. Negotiation, trade, and
court cases all fall under this general heading. Political adventures
tend to involve little combat, and normally cannot be solved by the
simple application of magic, which makes them good for more powerful
magi. It also makes them a good place for companions to shine,
particularly mundane politics, where The Gift is a serious hindrance to
the magi.

Political Issues

A Hermetic Tribunal is coming up, and the other covenants are looking
for allies. Of course, choosing to work with one makes enemies of
another.

One of the player magi is framed for a serious Hermetic crime.

One of the player magi is caught in a serious Hermetic crime.

The covenant tries to build good relations with a local mundane notable,
such as a lord, bishop, or abbot.

A mundane enemy of the covenant tries to take an important piece of
land, possibly containing a vis source, off them through legal
processes.

War threatens to break out in the region around the covenant. While the
magi could stay neutral and, most likely, survive, it would not be good
for the covenant. Can they broker a peace?

The local bishop begins preaching vigorously against heresy, and priests
are instructed to enquire much more closely into people\'s activities.
Many people resent this, but no-one dares to speak out publicly for fear
of being branded a heretic.

The player character magi disagree strongly over the best course of
action to take, and spend the entire session arguing about it.

Quests

Quests shape a series of stories, rather than a single story. They
differ from treasure hunting in that the object of the quest is more
elevated, and the process of getting there is as important, and
significant for the characters, as the discovery itself. In troupe-style
play, a quest is best designed to be split up by stories involving other
characters, so that people do not feel that one character's obsession is
taking over the saga.

Objects of Quests

The Holy Grail.

The cave where Bonisagus devised the Parma Magica.

The lost rituals of the Cult of Mercury.

The resting place of one of the Old Ones, powerful magical creatures who
died, or fell asleep, millennia ago.

The fields of Elysium.

The secret of raising the dead through Hermetic magic.

The character\'s father.

True faith in God.
