Sagas

A saga is a series of connected stories, centered around a single
covenant. In some cases the only connection between two stories is that
both happen to people who live at the covenant, and not even the same
people. Other stories are linked into a longer narrative, with a major
climax. This chapter provides guidance on how to run a good saga.

Background Questions

While products from Atlas Games provide a wealth of detail about the
background of Ars Magica, there are always areas which are open to
interpretation by individual troupes. In many cases these are matters
that can simply be ignored when writing books, but in others it is more
a question of how you use a book in your sagas. This section looks at a
few of the more significant choices you need to consider when deciding
how Ars Magica works for your troupe.

Rules Questions

Another set of questions you need to decide is how you will use the
rules.

First, the rules in the Laboratory and Long-Term Events chapters are
only used when the saga stretches over a significant period of game
time. You don\'t need to worry about them for your first couple of
stories.

Beyond that, the game as written can be played and enjoyed, at least
according to the playtesters. However, you might want to add House
Rules, to make things better fit your playing style.

For example, the core rules pay very little attention to economics. As
written, this is a game about mighty wizards in a world of legends, and
they don\'t have to worry about how much their socks cost. However, you
might want to play magical merchants criss-crossing Mythic Europe and
building trade routes that support marvelous cities. An excellent
concept, but you will have to add House Rules for trade, and the effects
of trade on cities. (Or, possibly, buy *City & Guild*.)

There are some changes you might want to make even if you play something
very close to the core game. For example, your group might prefer not to
have major events happen purely on the roll of the dice. In that case,
you can simply ignore stress dice, and always use a simple die. If you
do that, a character\'s skill will always be the main influence on a
situation. Of course, you need to make that clear up front, because a
number of Virtues and Flaws rely on the stress die.

More fundamental changes are also possible. In \'canon\' (the game as
defined by the published rules and supplements) mundane humans have
virtually no resistance to magic. You might decide to give all
Christians, Jews, and Muslims a Magic Resistance equal to five times the
level of the local Dominion aura. This will make it almost impossible
for magi to affect someone in a town, and drives a stronger separation
of the mundane and the supernatural.

Most gamers find that some features of the game don\'t suit them
perfectly. Making up House Rules to fix this is entirely normal, and
even to be encouraged; there are some people who like tinkering with
rules almost as much as they like playing. In fact, if your group finds
that you have the most fun if you spend several hours a week hashing out
new rules to make, for example, the book rules exactly match the latest
research on medieval study styles and libraries, and never actually
*play* any characters, then go ahead.

At the other extreme, you might find that worrying about game statistics
interferes with the flow of your stories, and things work much better
when players just say what their magus does. If that works for you, then
you can use the spell guidelines as nothing more than inspiration for
the sorts of things your magi might do.

The rules and background for Ars Magica as written do favor a particular
style of play, but if that doesn\'t match your style, you should change
the rules and background so that it does.

History

Perhaps the most obvious question concerns how much history you want to
use, and how close to historical events you want to stay. Some troupes
like to keep mundane history the same as real history, and have the
Order of Hermes acting entirely behind the scenes. Others prefer to have
the magi change things, so that political events look very different
from our history. Still others prefer to change things around entirely.

This is a slightly different issue from the best way to include history
in a game (see Making it Historical, page @@). All the hints there apply
no matter what you choose, although, obviously, the more you want to
change things, the less you have to worry about anachronisms.

You might want to run a saga which has very little interaction with the
mundane world. Mythic Europe, with historical kings and bishops, is
there in the background, but most adventures take place in magical
auras, faerie forests, or infernal temples. This sort of saga can be
very high fantasy without much problem.

At the other extreme, you might want to put the covenant in a major
city, such as Paris, Rome, Constantinople, or Jerusalem, and have the
player characters deal with the politics and culture of Mythic Europe on
a daily basis.

It is even possible to combine the two ideas, although this requires the
most work from the storyguide. Many medieval legends are high fantasy,
and they can be real in your version of Mythic Europe. You might place
the covenant in a version of Constantinople where the city walls really
are made of gold and studded with gems, and magical statues and other
wizards are a common sight on the streets. This combination is difficult
because you need to find medieval legends, and then make medieval
society work around them. On the other hand, it is extremely rewarding,
and it is possible to do it for one location rather than an entire saga.

The troupe must simply decide whether the magi can change history. The
assumption in official books is that the history of Mythic Europe looks,
on the surface, like that of medieval Europe until 1220, the canonical
starting date. However, many of the reasons behind historical events
involve wizards, faeries, and other mystical creatures. The default
assumption is that Mythic history will diverge from real history after
1220, as player characters interfere, but that need not be true in your
saga.

The Order of Hermes

The Order of Hermes might seem to be very well defined in the books, but
in fact a very important question is left vague, for individual troupes
to determine. How organized is the Order in practice? In theory,
Tribunals, Quaesitors, Redcaps, and the Peripheral Code tie everything
together and enforce a myriad rules. In your saga, that might be the
case in practice as well, so that player characters who break the Code
face punishment, unless they take careful steps to hide their
infractions. Individual covenants might have to register with the
Tribunal or be forcibly removed, and all new magi might be recorded in a
central register.

At the other extreme, Tribunals might be primarily social events, where
the Code is only actually enforced if someone has made enemies of
virtually every other magus in the area. Magi a century old might
frequently appear and announce that they have been members of the Order
for decades, and Redcaps might be supported by individual covenants who
need messengers, rather than by the Order.

Both versions of the Order are fun to play, but they produce very
different sagas. The more intrusive and organized the Order is, the
larger the role that politics plays in the saga. An Order that does not
bother to enforce its rules allows the player characters to essentially
ignore it and concentrate on adventures. It also allows the player
characters to become overtly involved in mundane politics.

The Church

The Church is an important institution throughout Europe, and it is all
but impossible to avoid at least some interaction with it. This means
that you must make a decision on how to portray the Church in your saga.
Because Christianity is a living religion, and the contemporary Roman
Catholic church is institutionally continuous with the Western medieval
church on which the Mythic version is based, this is a question you
should discuss with your troupe, to avoid offending anyone.

The fundamental choice is between a Church which is basically good with
a few bad members, and a Church which is basically evil, with a few good
members. A Church perfectly balanced between good and evil is
theoretically possible, but only likely to work in practice if the
players encounter the clergy only rarely.

You should also decide on the Church\'s attitude to magic. Historically,
the church in this period condemned magic as nothing but deception and
lies, but that is not really a tenable position in Mythic Europe. The
Church might believe that magic is the work of the devil, and thus
sinful, or that it involves the use of God-given gifts, and thus can be
virtuous, if used for good ends. Alternatively, the Church might be in
the throes of a debate on this very topic.

The canonical setting does assume that relations between the Church and
the Order of Hermes are cool, at best, although there are individuals on
both sides with better or worse relationships across the divide. Sagas
where the Order tries to overthrow the Church can be exciting, as can
sagas where the Order tries to join the Church, or, of course, where the
Church simply is not very important to the player characters.

The Infernal

How many demons do you want in your saga? Demons and diabolists make
excellent unambiguous enemies, but the extent to which you use them has
a strong effect on the tone of the saga. If there are demons everywhere
and a diabolist in every village, then you have a very dark setting
where the characters are surrounded by enemies. On the other hand, one
diabolist as the main enemy for a saga can be much more hopeful, as
things get better once the enemy is defeated.

You should also consider how you want to play demons. Traditionally,
they are interested in souls, but also have a penchant for violence and
destruction. Emphasizing the violence makes demons into monsters the
player characters have to kill, while emphasizing their efforts to
corrupt people makes for much more subtle enemies. Subtle enemies are
not necessarily a good thing; your players may not want their characters
to wrestle with ambiguous moral choices or struggle with temptation.

The Fate of Magic

A common trope in stories involving a magical past is the decline of
magic, so that eventually the magic goes away and leaves us with our
contemporary world. The canonical background to Ars Magica assumes that,
if this is happening, it is so slow that no-one has yet noticed it.
Magical auras give way to the Dominion in some places, but in others
magic grows stronger.

In your saga, magic could be declining, rising, or steady. Steady magic
is the least intrusive on play, as either of the others will have a
profound influence on a saga full of magi. It is also the default
assumption of sourcebooks; magic was neither stronger nor weaker when
the Order was founded, and has not changed noticeably since.

On the other hand, the decline of magic can easily be linked to the
advance of the Dominion. As western Europe leaves the Dark Ages and
civilization starts to spread once more, remote areas that used to be
magical wilderness become incorporated into farmland. By 1220 this might
no longer be an occasional nuisance, but rather a serious threat to the
Order, as auras vanish and vis sources become scarce.

Magic could also be declining along with all the other supernatural
powers, in which case the Dominion would suffer as much as the Order of
Hermes. Miracles would become less common, fewer demons would appear,
and faeries would retreat fully into stories. Such a background sets up
a tragedy for magi, unless they have the chance to reverse the decline.

A third option is to have magic on the rise, again either in opposition
to the other supernatural auras or in concert with them. This might work
well if you want to start with a saga that is closely tied to mundane
historical facts, and increase the level of fantasy later. If only magic
increases in power, the player characters might become more powerful
than any opposition, but if all the realms increase together the
newly-powerful magi will face newly-powerful priests, faeries, and
demons, so the challenge remains, just at a greater scale.

Saga Speed

Advancement in Ars Magica happens by seasons of game time (see
Advancement, page @@), and so the number of seasons of game time that
pass for every game session is an extremely important factor in
determining the style of a saga. The ideal saga speed is entirely a
matter of troupe preference, but it is important to be aware of the
implications in advance. Fortunately it is easy to speed up or slow down
a saga if you decide that you have made a mistake.

Resources

The resources to which the player characters have access also influence
the speed of advancement, although that influence is much lower than the
speed of the saga. It doesn\'t matter how many books or how much vis the
characters in a slow saga have; they never have time to study them.

Nevertheless, it is important to give some thought to resources.

Vis comes in two ways: vis finds, which don\'t renew, and vis sources,
which do. Early in the saga it is better to hand out vis finds, rather
than sources. You can then keep track of how much the player characters
use, and decide how much vis you want them to have, before you hand out
sources. Vis finds run out naturally, while sources have to be taken
away, which might annoy the players.

Vis amounts are highly saga-dependent, and there is no \'right\' way to
do it. The following numbers are merely a guideline.

Low vis: Up to 5 pawns/magus/year. Studying from vis is very rare, and
vis-boosting the Penetration of spells is almost unheard of. Only
necessary rituals are cast, and enchanted items are uncommon.

Moderate vis: Around 10 pawns/magus/year. Studying from vis is common,
although books are still preferred. Enchanted items can be made fairly
easily; the main concern is getting the right kind of vis, not the
amount. Rituals can be cast if they are helpful, and in extreme
situations the magi might use vis to boost spell Penetration.

High vis: Around 20 pawns/magus/year. Magi can do pretty much anything
they want involving vis. This is probably too much vis for most sagas.

Books also come in two sorts, summae and tractatus, and the analogy goes
further than that. Because a tractatus can only be studied once by a
given character, you can be fairly sure of the effect that it will have.
If you want to keep the rate of power advancement down, restrict the
number of summae the covenant has, and don\'t let the covenant build up
a large reserve of tractatus no-one has studied yet. In addition, when a
magus\'s Arts reach the point of being as high as you are comfortable
with, cut off the supply of books. The magus can still invent spells or
learn other Arts, and that buys you time to become accustomed to the new
level of power.

Don\'t forget that magi in a covenant can write books for each other.
You shouldn\'t interfere with such activities, but should take them into
account.

Slow Saga

In a slow saga there are, on average, two or more game sessions per
season. Characters do not improve much, and the different lifespans of
magi and companions are largely irrelevant.

The main advantage of this style of saga is that the style of play does
not have to change much (see Power Levels, page @@). The main
disadvantage is that the laboratory rules, which are central to Ars
Magica, will get little use. In addition, players may become frustrated
if their characters do not improve. This style is closest to the
conventional style of most roleplaying games, and is a good way to start
a saga, as it allows everyone to get used to their characters and
establish their personalities before time, perhaps, starts to pass more
quickly.

If you intend to play a slow saga, Virtues and Flaws affecting study,
lifespan, and other seasonal activities in game are much less
significant, while those that affect the character\'s starting scores
are much more significant. There is no need to change the classification
of any Virtues or Flaws, unless you want to, but players should be aware
of the relative importance of the different types when they are creating
their characters.

Medium Saga

A medium saga has, on average, one to four seasons per game session.
Characters do improve, but unless you play very frequently, or over a
long period of real time, magi are unlikely to die of old age or pass
into Final Twilight.

A medium saga is a good compromise rate, and an excellent way to start,
since it is fairly easy to slow down or speed up, as required. Flaws
affecting study are of similar significance to those affecting character
generation, so players need not pay attention to such subtleties.

In a medium saga it is quite likely that companions and grogs will die
of old age, although probably not until the saga is rather advanced. As
the characters are likely to have seen extensive play before their
deaths, this can create excellent opportunities for roleplaying, and the
chance to play the heir of a favored character.

Fast Saga

In a fast saga, more than one year passes per game session, on average.
In a fast saga, magi rapidly become powerful, and a magus who starts the
saga fresh from his gauntlet can expect to die of natural causes before
the end. Companions may be played only a handful of times before they
die of old age.

In fast sagas, the emphasis is very much on the magi, particularly once
they have become powerful (see Power Levels, page @@). Virtues and Flaws
that affect only a character\'s starting scores are much less important,
and should probably be made reclassified or made more effective if they
are to be balanced.

Fast sagas are good for players who want to play epic magi who create
magical effects which influence the whole of Europe, but they are not a
good way to start a saga. In a fast saga, characters change radically
almost before you know it, so a slightly slower start is a good way to
get to know them. If some members of the troupe are new to Ars Magica,
it would be rather difficult for them to manage five or more seasons of
study between every game session.

Pulsed Saga

A pulsed saga combines the fast and slow sagas. A dozen game sessions
might cover a single season, but then twelve game years might pass
before the next session.

Pulsed sagas have many advantages. The intense bursts of activity give
companions and grogs ample opportunities for play, while the long
periods of downtime allow characters to study, and magi can advance to
high levels of power.

Most sagas are pulsed to some extent, as it is very unusual to hit
exactly the average rate every session. It only really becomes a
separate style when the contrast between rates becomes extreme. This
also creates the main problem with this speed of saga: it can be
difficult to provide an in-game reason for everything becoming quiet for
years of game time, after the characters have spent a season involved in
one adventure every week. If you do want to play a pulsed saga, it is
important for the storyguide to work out how each story arc will finish,
and why any loose ends will wait years before needing to be resolved.

Troupe-Style Roleplaying

In a typical roleplaying game one person serves as the gamemaster, while
the other participants have one character each, whom they play from
session to session. Troupe-style roleplaying breaks away from those
assumptions, and this can make it difficult for experienced roleplayers
to get into. There are a number of types of troupe-style play, and while
they are listed in ascending order of difference from standard
roleplaying this is not meant to suggest that the later forms are better
than the earlier. If you want to try the full range, it is probably best
to work up through the stages, so that people get used to the differing
roles of troupe-style games, but you can also pick a single stage that
sits well with your group and simply use that.

If Ars Magica is your first roleplaying game, you should simply select
the style that seems most appealing, and then modify it as necessary so
that everyone is having fun.

Although none of the styles of troupe-style play are better for
everyone, it is almost always better to use some version of troupe-style
play rather than conventional play. This is because, although the game
is centered on magi, it is very hard to run a whole saga in which the
players play their magi in every session. For one thing, it becomes very
difficult to challenge a whole group of fairly experienced magi, as at
least one member of the group is likely to be skilled at any form of
magic. It can be done, but having to do it every session is likely to
strain the storyguide. Another problem is that magi like to spend time
in their laboratories, and they might well not want to go out at the
same time. After a while, it can come to seem rather artificial if
everyone drops everything to go on an adventure.

However, if you play in the conventional fashion and some players have
non-magi, different problems arise. First, magi are far more powerful
than other characters, and get far more attention in the rules. Someone
stuck playing a knight might well find his character aging and dying,
possibly of boredom, while the magi study magic and create enchanted
devices, and even when he does get to see some action he is likely to be
overshadowed by the magi in most adventures.

Even the simplest troupe-style play avoids these problems, as every
player has a magus and another character. Thus, you should at least try
it out.

Alternative Characters

In this version of troupe-style play each player has two or more
characters, but only plays one of them in a given session. At least one
character should be a magus, and at least one should be a companion (see
page @@). There is nothing to stop a player having two magi and four
companions, if he can cope with only playing each character once every
six sessions or so, and with the book-keeping of keeping each character
up to date.

If you play this way, it is essential that a player\'s characters have
good reasons not to go on adventures together. They may dislike each
other, but this is not essential. Instead, one player\'s companion could
be closely linked to another player\'s magus, or the two characters
could have very different interests.

This style of play is quite close to conventional roleplaying, in that
everyone has their own characters, and no-one is handling more than one
character at once. As an extra bonus, it makes it easy for players to
introduce new characters if they become tired of an old character or
don\'t like the way he is developing in the saga. This style avoids many
of the serious problems that the conventional style raises in Ars
Magica, but it can still lead to rather more magi going on an adventure
than is ideal.

Pooled Characters

Playing with pooled characters means that, in addition to a player\'s
magi and companions, there is also a \'pool\' of grogs and bit-parts,
who can be played by anyone. Thus, on a typical adventure, one player
might play his magus, a second her companion, while the other two take
grogs from the common pool.

This has a number of advantages. First, the number of magi in a group
tends to be small, which makes them easier to challenge. Second, the
covenant staff get to appear on stage, without condemning anyone to
playing bit parts all the time. Third, when playing a grog you can cut
loose and enjoy yourself. If you overact and ham up your main character,
you are likely to end up annoying the other players. On the other hand,
a grog who is hammed up can be restricted to small doses, making him
entertaining rather than annoying.

More generally, because a grog is not your main character, it is easier
to take major risks, or to do things that you know make the character
look stupid. The actions of grogs can be some of the most memorable
aspects of adventures. It is also possible to run more than one grog at
a time, since they can fade into the background while another character
takes most of your playing attention.

From the storyguide\'s perspective, you can kill grogs to emphasize the
seriousness of a situation without killing characters into which the
players have invested vast amounts of emotional energy. In games with
pooled grogs, grogs are supposed to die. They are played enough for the
players to care, but they are not so central that a grog death means a
major change in the saga. This applies to other major events; grogs get
maimed, go mad, or acquire responsibilities that mean they can no longer
go on adventures.

In this style of game it is very important for each pooled grog to be
looked after by a single player for development between sessions. It is
probably best to start with just one grog per player, and create more as
people get more used to using the advancement systems. The player
managing the grog\'s downtime activities gets to say what he does in his
time off, and as the number of grogs grows some troupes enjoy spending
time on the soap-operatic aspects of the relations between the grogs and
the magi.

It is important to remember that Ars Magica\'s advancement system means
that characters do not fall behind in power when they are not played, so
that players\' primary characters do not lose out when the players are
running grogs.

Another major advantage of this style of play is that it can easily
handle player absences, particularly if the player warns the troupe in
advance. As long as the troupe can get that player\'s main characters
home before the session for which the player is absent, there is no
problem at all, just one fewer people to play grogs. The system can even
handle players leaving for years to work overseas; their characters fade
into the background, spending all their time in the lab, and then can
rejoin the saga when the player gets back, still at the same sort of
power level as the characters who have been played.

Of course, the game does still rely on the storyguide being available.

Guest Storyguiding

The next level of troupe-style playing involves a player occasionally
running a session. The normal storyguide can play some of the pooled
grogs, and thus remains involved in the game.

This has a major advantage, in that it gives the regular storyguide an
occasional break, which can be very good for both creativity and
enthusiasm. It also allows someone to have a go at storyguiding without
committing to running a whole saga.

There are, however, potential problems. Since the regular storyguide is
going to play, the guest storyguide cannot check all the details of the
story in advance, so there is a risk of clashing with the regular
storyguide\'s long-term plans.

The best way to avoid such problems is to have the guest storyguides run
stories that take place in isolated locations, such as a distant island,
or a cave complex. Regiones (page @@) are excellent for this sort of
thing, particularly if they can only be entered under rare conditions,
so that the characters cannot go back. The guest storyguide should
discuss the sorts of rewards and risks that he can include, so as to
avoid upsetting the regular storyguide\'s plans. It is even possible for
the guest storyguide to run a story that takes place in a dream, so that
it has no long-term effect on the saga at all, but such devices can
easily be overused.

Alpha and Beta Storyguides

The next step is to have more than one member of the troupe acting as
storyguide on a regular basis. One storyguide, the alpha storyguide, is
responsible for the overall shape of the saga, and has final veto power
on story additions, but one or more beta storyguides take responsibility
for specific aspects of the saga. A beta storyguide might be responsible
for a particular magical regio, or for a local faerie forest, or for the
covenant itself, if the characters have joined an old and large
institution. As long as the action remains within that location, the
beta storyguide has free rein. Some of the participants are still just
players, however.

The big advantage of this style is that the alpha storyguide can have a
magus and companion, as long as they are designed to go on the sorts of
adventures that the beta storyguide runs. In addition, this version of
troupe-style play can handle the alpha storyguide\'s absence as easily
as that of any other player, as long as there is some advance notice.

The alpha and beta storyguides should make sure that they are agreed on
the sort of reward level that is appropriate, and on the tone of the
saga and its individual parts. There is nothing wrong with making a
faerie forest into a comedic part of a saga, as long as everyone is
agreed in advance, but introducing laser guns and spaceships is likely
to cause problems.

This style has the additional advantage that events can sometimes
surprise everyone, including all the storyguides, when the different
plots interact in unexpected ways. This is an advantage, in the same way
as unexpected player actions are good for a conventional game, but it
does mean that the storyguides need to be very flexible.

Pure Troupe Style

In the purest form of troupe style, everyone runs games in roughly equal
amounts, and there is no alpha storyguide. This requires quite a bit of
coordination, and the troupe must decide on a method for resolving
disputes in rule interpretation. One possibility is to have one person
as the \'rules storyguide\', and have her interpretation be final, but a
more democratic method might also work if the group is willing to
cooperate.

This style gives everyone an equal chance to run the game and play
characters, and can handle any anticipated player absences without any
trouble. If one player runs out of storyguiding ideas, she can simply
play for a while, until something new occurs to her.

Pure troupe style does, however, require a group of players all of whom
are comfortable with rules and with running games. This might prove
difficult, especially if the troupe recruits new members from time to
time.

Researching a Setting

So, you\'ve decided you want to run an Ars Magica saga. What now? You
need to create the covenant, probably with the co-operation of the
players (see page @@), and then you need to put it somewhere. There are
a number of options for this, and none is better or worse than the
others. You can even switch between them during a saga, either doing
more research, or deliberately including more non-historical elements.

Research needn\'t involve books and libraries. You can search on the
internet, ask questions on discussion forums, or watch historical
documentaries on television. This is, after all, a game, so you should
research the things you find interesting, in a way you find enjoyable.

The Pure Fantasy Saga

You can set your saga in a pure fantasy world. You might adapt a
published one to include the Order of Hermes, or create your own. The
advantage is that you don\'t have to worry about historical facts at
all, and can have exactly the setting you want. The disadvantage is that
the setting of Ars Magica has even influenced the mechanics, so you will
find that you have to adapt or ignore a lot of the game material.

The No-Research Saga

Pick a Tribunal for the covenant (see the map on page @@). Pick names
for the local nobility, towns, and parish church. Decide what sort of
geography you want. Use elements from the Mythic Europe chapter (page
@@) to make your stories feel medieval. Have fun, and ignore people
telling you that the king of England in 1220 wasn\'t William the
Bastard.

The Low-Research Saga

Get hold of a modern map of Europe, and pick an area with the sort of
terrain you want. Look up twelfth and thirteenth century events in an
encyclopedia or general world history, to give you a few names and
trends. Most of the cities, towns, and villages in modern Europe were
there in the Middle Ages, only smaller, so shrink places. (There are
some exceptions, but at this level of research, you don\'t want to worry
about that.) Add more forest. Roads, with the exceptions of
freeways/motorways/autobahn, tend to follow historic routes that
sometimes go back to the Romans, so you can use those as described.

From that point, things proceed as for the no-research saga.

Alternatively, buy one of the Tribunal Books from Atlas Games, and set
your saga in that Tribunal. This gives you most of the benefits of the
Extreme-Research Saga, with a level of effort more like the Low-Research
version.

The Medium-Research Saga

Pick your area from a modern map, as above. Then find a history of that
area, and read the chapters on the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
This will give you quite a few names, a fair bit of social detail, and
some idea of which towns were important back then. Work what you\'ve
learned into your saga in a way that will impress your players.

The High-Research Saga

Once you have chosen your area, get hold of a history of that area that
focuses on the twelfth of thirteenth centuries. Reading such a book will
probably give you more information than you can possibly include in a
saga. More recent histories are better for gaming purposes than older
ones, because recent historians tend to pay more attention to what life
was like, and to events other than battles and the deaths of kings. Give
characters names that match the sorts of names you find in the book, so
that they \'sound right\'. Have the repercussions of events you read
about affect the covenant. Foreshadow future history, giving the players
a chance to change it. And so on.

The Extreme-Research Saga

Read several single-volume histories of the area in question, to get a
more balanced view. Find, and read, histories of specific aspects, such
as the history of a single city, or of the law, or of the Church, or
even a single monastery. Track down books written in or about your area
during the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, and read them in
translation. Learn Latin so that you can read the ones that haven\'t
been translated yet. Learn paleography so that you can read the ones
still in manuscript. Go back to university and get a Ph.D. in medieval
studies while actually just researching your saga.

Somewhere before the \'learn Latin\' stage is the amount of research
that most authors do before writing a Tribunal book or similar piece of
setting material for the line. For a personal saga, that\'s a lot of
research.

Saga Styles

There are a number of different ways of playing Ars Magica, all valid,
and many compatible with each other. Indeed, almost any combination is
possible over the course of a saga, particularly as there is nothing
wrong with the style of a saga changing over time. The descriptions here
are merely intended to give you some ideas, and help you work out what
sort of saga you want to play.

High Fantasy

The characters spend much of their time dealing with demons, faeries,
giants, dragons, and angels. Powerful, flashy mystical effects are
extremely common, dealing with mundanes is not. This works particularly
well with a low-research saga, as high fantasy elements have to be made
up anyway.

Mundane Interactions

The characters spend a lot of time dealing with local nobles, churchmen,
bandits, and traders. They might worry about whether the covenant has
enough cattle to provide the vellum for its library, or be concerned
with the trend towards violent antisemitism sweeping the country. Magic
might be used a lot, but it tends to be low-key and subtle, even if it
is powerful.

Hermetic Life

The characters spend most of their time interacting with other Hermetic
magi. They might be dedicated politicians in the local Tribunal,
bibliophiles trying to gather the finest library in the Order, or
Hoplites dedicated to hunting down any magus who turns to diabolism.

Action-Adventure

The characters fight and defeat enemies, whether by force of arms or
force of magic. They may or may not loot the bodies afterwards.

Investigation

The characters unravel mysteries, discover murderers, and trace the
resting place of lost treasures.

Politics

The characters negotiate with others to get what they want, or to help
their allies get what they want.

Creation

The characters are trying to build something, whether abstract or
concrete. They might be trying to create the strongest, most vibrant
covenant in the Order, or a giant flying ship, or bring justice and
peace to a war-torn area of Europe.

Saga Priorities

The highest priority for any saga is to ensure that all the players are
having fun. This is much easier if you have good communication between
the players, and people are not afraid to talk about what they do and
don't enjoy in the game.

If one player finds certain story elements upsetting or offensive, then
you shouldn't include them. If another player finds the *absence* of the
same elements upsetting or offensive, then you have a real problem
within the group that you will need to talk about. The historical
setting of Ars Magica makes this sort of conflict more likely than it
might be in other games. For example, a Christian player might find plot
lines that portray the Church as corrupt offensive, but a pagan player
might find plot lines that portray the Church as virtuous equally
offensive. The only way to resolve such problems is to talk about them,
and the resolution might be a decision that Ars Magica is the wrong game
for your group.

On a less serious level, different people enjoy different styles of
story. The covenant and troupe-style play mean that Ars Magica is
well-adapted to covering many styles of story in a single saga, and so
this sort of problem can generally be solved within the game. Players
should be allowed to adapt their characters, or introduce new ones, if
they find that their existing characters do not fit well with the sorts
of story they enjoy. On the other hand, if the main storyguide does not
enjoy running the kinds of story that certain players want, that might
be a good opportunity to try out guest storyguiding. Communication and
tolerance are also important for resolving this issue, as players may
have to put up with some stories that are not really their thing, so
that everyone can have fun.

Finally, "game balance" in Ars Magica is nothing more than a tool for
making sure that all the players have fun, by making it hard for one
player's character to monopolise the spotlight. Magi are not balanced
against companions, but the idea is that everyone will take turns
playing their magi and companions, and so the spotlight will move
around. This means that you do not need to worry too much about game
balance when modifying the rules to suit your play style. As long as the
changes help everyone to have fun, they are good.

Roleplaying games are a way to explore other worlds, other perspectives,
and other possibilities. But they are, or at least Ars Magica is, first
and foremost entertainment.

Enjoy yourselves.

Quid rides? Mutato nomine, de te fabula narrantur. --- Horace, Satires
